---
title: The House That Olivia Built
layout: about
permalink: /digital-exhibition/house-that-olivia-built.html
# include CollectionBuilder info at bottom
credits: false
# Edit the markdown on in this file to describe your collection
# Look in _includes/feature for options to easily add features to the page
---

When Samuel and Olivia Clemens decided to move to Hartford, they were pursuing both financial and social stability. In the 1870s Hartford was a growing city aiming to become one of the foremost business centers in the United States, attracting people from all classes and backgrounds. Hartford offered a variety of business opportunities for Samuel and the social network required of and familiar to someone of Olivia’s background.

When the couple arrived in Hartford in October 1871, they rented rooms from Olivia’s friends John and Isabella Beecher Hooker as they began to immerse themselves into Hartford Society. Later that year, Olivia wrote to Samuel, “I think I have decided what we shall do about building. I have decided so you will not have to decide, Dear Heart.” In 1873, using money from Olivia’s inheritance, the couple purchased a parcel of land in the Hartford neighborhood of Nook Farm and hired architect Edward Tuckerman Potter to design and build the stately 19-room mansion.

It was a wholly personal connection, neighbors George and Lilly Warner, that brought architect Potter to the Clemenses. George Warner admired a townhouse on 37th Street in New York City that Potter had designed and the Warners hired Potter to build their home on Forest Street, just a little south of the land that Olivia Clemens had her eye on for their house. “I want immensely to get that house for Potter,” George wrote to Lilly of the commision to build the Clemens house.

George succeeded. The Clemenses bought the land, and Potter set to work designing it according to a plan Olivia Clemens had drawn up two years before. Construction began in August 1873, when the Clemenses were abroad touring Scotland, Ireland, and England. Both Samuel and Olivia kept up with the house-building project. Potter designed the house as well as the landscape and was the lead on all aspects of the project. John Garvie was the local general contractor hired for the building and Charles Macrae was a Hartford florist and gardener hired to plant the lawn, trees, and flowerbeds. Then as now bringing outside contractors onto a local job site seems to have caused some issues for the architect Potter. “I have reminded Garvie to obey Potter’s orders,” Sam wrote in a letter. “Have blown up Mr. McCray & told him not to offend again by taking orders from anybody but Mr. Potter.”Despite numerous construction delays and hikes in construction costs, the family was able to move into their mostly completed house on September 19, 1874. 

The resulting home measures 11‚500 square feet and has 25 rooms across three floors. The house, while a fitting addition to the exclusive Nook Farm neighborhood, was reported to be “ the oddest piece of architecture in this city…on Farmington avenue, about a mile west of the depot, is a house being built for Mark Twain..”  It was built with the latest in modern innovations, including gas lighting, heated running water, and a telephone.

The couple spent close to $45‚000 building their new home, exhausting their financial reserves. The architect Potter was considerate of his clients, making sure the building’s basics were complete before getting over-involved with decorating. “You suggested we let up on the fancy touches till we knew how things were going to turn out,” Potter wrote to Clemens around the time he completed working on the house in 1875. As such, when the family moved in, the interiors were kept simply furnished until the couple could afford to finish them to the high standards expected by the surrounding society of which they were now members.  Potter would return in 1881 when the Clemenses expanded the kitchen and decorated the house’s rooms, getting  his assistant, Albert H. Thorp, to oversee the work, while ensuring that the house would be completed in a grander manner.

## GRID: Edward Tuckerman Potter (1831-1904)
Edward Tuckerman Potter designed the Clemens house in Hartford. Mainly known for his church architecture, and for an octagonal Moorish-style building in the midst of the Union College campus in Schenectady, New York, complete with a mosque-like dome, Potter had upstate New York roots. His father was a bishop in the Episcopal Church. Potter designed churches throughout Northeast and Midwest America, influenced by his teacher, Richard Upjohn, who in turn was inspired by the English art critic John Ruskin, who called for rooting current architecture in England’s own Gothic traditions rather than the Roman-inspired architecture of the 18th century.

Potter’s interest in churches led him to write church music as well. He was described by contemporaries as a gentle man with a good singing voice and a love of fine food and literature.  He had done work in and around Hartford, including the Church of the Holy Shepherd in the city’s South Meadows, a job for Elizabeth Colt, the widow and business successor of six-gun manufacturer Samuel Colt. The building still displays in carved bas-relief the weapons that brought the Colts their fame and wealth. 

## GRID: Alfred H. Thorp (1843-1919)
In the construction of the Clemenses’ Hartford house architect Edward Tuckerman Potter was aided by the New York architect Alfred H. Thorp, who has been seen as the French connection by scholars trying to puzzle out medieval European influences on the Clemens home. Thorp had studied in Paris with the renowned architect Pierre Jérôme Honoré Daumet, known for his elegant work on civic and church buildings, including the chapel at the Palace of Versailles. The same year the Clemenses’ Hartford home was built, Thorp was also contracted to build Clemens a writing study at the Elmira home of Olivia’s sister, Susan Crane. 

When the Clemenses expanded their kitchen and redecorated the house in 1881, Thorp supervised the construction work. Olivia Clemens wrangled with Thorp over the windows in the entry hall – he wanted less glass and she wanted more to light what admittedly is a dark space for welcoming visitors.

Thorp went on to design and build a building in 1876 that architectural historian Sarah Landau says "illustrates an important development in the evolution of early skyscraper style." Built at Sixth Avenue and 26th Street in 1876 for the New York Racquet Court Club, the building had two courts, a gymnasium and bowling facilities,  painted differently for daytime and nighttime play.  The building received landmark status from the city in 1989, only to have it almost immediately revoked, and it was demolished.