---
title: Bushnell Park
layout: about
permalink: /digital-exhibition/clemens-era-hartford/bushnell-park.html
# include CollectionBuilder info at bottom
credits: false
# Edit the markdown on in this file to describe your collection
# Look in _includes/feature for options to easily add features to the page
parent: clemens-era-hartford
landing-page: clemens-era-hartford
---

{% include feature/image.html objectid="hpl_hhc_cp_a75" width="75" %}

Bushnell Park is the main greenspace in downtown Hartford and it was purposefully created to be so. In the 1850s Hartford was a booming town full of economic success that brought people here to work in a variety of industries including publishing, insurance, banking, munitions, and manufacturing. During this time of rapid industrialization was also a movement to bring curated pockets of nature into cities, like Central Park in New York City. 

When Hartford decided to add their own park, they did contact Frederick Law Olmstead, a Hartford Native and friend of Dr. Horace Bushnell, who was pushing for the park’s creation. Unfortunately, Olmstead was busy with Central Park, but recommended Swiss-born landscape architect and botanist Jacob Wedinman for the job. 

Wedinman was hired and according to the Bushnell Park Conservancy: Weidenmann’s plan of 1861 had a distinctive natural style, which featured smoothly sculpted contours and graceful paths leading to focal points like the meandering Park River. The plan included informal clusters of evergreen and deciduous trees, which screened the sites and sounds of the city, a departure from the formal New England square or central green.

As part of the plan, Weidenmann selected 157 varieties of [Trees](https://bushnellpark.org/attractions/champion-trees/) and shrubs from North America, Europe and eastern Asia to grace the park. A total of 1,100 individual specimens were planted, creating a canopy of green covering the Park. Over the years, many important architectural features, such as the [Soldiers & Sailors Memorial Arch](https://bushnellpark.org/attractions/soldiers-sailors-memorial-arch/) (1886), [the Capitol](https://bushnellpark.org/attractions/state-capitol/) (1876), [Corning Fountain](https://bushnellpark.org/attractions/corning-fountain/) (1899), [the Carousel](https://bushnellpark.org/history/the-carousel/) (1974) and the [Performance Pavilion](https://bushnellpark.org/attractions/performance-pavilion/) (1995) were added, while other scenic elements, such as the [Park River](https://bushnellpark.org/history/the-park-river/) and its several graceful bridges, were demolished in the 1940s.

<button type="button" class="collapsible">Twain and Grant in Bushnell</button>
<div class="content">
  <p>On October 14, 1880, Samuel Clemens made his way by train to Boston to meet the former commanding general of the U.S. Army and former U.S. President, Ulysses S. Grant. Clemens made the journey to accompany Grant to Hartford where he was slated to speak on behalf of the Republican presidential nominee that year, James A. Garfield. Grant considered, and eventually desired, a third term in office, however, he did not secure enough votes at the convention and fell short. In order to help support his party Grant traveled throughout the country to stump Garfield by making appearances and speeches. Many Hartford families prepared for the former President’s arrival by decorating their homes and businesses in a patriotic and festive manner. The Clemens family spent fifty dollars at Fox, Brusselars & Co.  to decorate their own residence for the occasion. Clemens and Grant arrived in Hartford on Friday so they could rest and prepare for the following day’s festivities. During their journey to Connecticut’s capital city they made a stop in Putnam and Willimantic. At the Willimantic Linen Company the 1,500 employees gathered in front of their new mill and welcomed Grant for his brief visit. They presented him with a cabinet containing various threads that were manufactured at the company’s mills. Before departing, various other prominent Hartford figures including General Joseph Hawley and author Charles Dudley Warner joined the final leg of the journey. They arrived in Hartford at noon and took carriages to the Allyn House to gather together before making their way to Bushnell Park where the crowds waited in anticipation. The city was almost at a standstill with most businesses closed and throngs of citizens filling the streets to catch a glimpse of their famous guest. The decorations filled downtown Hartford along the procession’s planned route and even elsewhere. The event’s kickoff consisted of a parade of five thousand which included marching bands, military companies, and various dignitaries. This was followed by a luncheon and formal reception, where Clemens delivered a welcome speech and introduced the honored guest on a stand in Bushnell Park.</p>
  <p>Clemens spoke as follows:</p>
  <p>_GENERAL GRANT: I also am deputized to welcome you to the sincere and cordial hospitalities of Hartford, the city of the historic and revered Charter Oak, of which the most of this town is built. \[Laugher.\] At first it was proposed to have only one speaker to welcome you, but this was changed because it was feared that, considering the shortness of the crop of speeches this year, if anything occurred to prevent that speaker from delivering his speech you would feel disappointed. \[Laughter and applause.\] I desire at this point to refer to your past history. By years of colossal labor and colossal achievement, you at last beat down a gigantic rebellion and saved your country from destruction. Then the country commanded you to take the helm of State. You preferred your great office of General of the Army, and the rest and comfort which it afforded, but you loyally obeyed and relinquished permanently the ample and well-earned salary of the Generalship, and resigned your accumulating years to the chance mercies of a precarious existence. \[Applause.\] By this present fatiguing progress through the land you are mightily contributing toward saving your country once more, this time from dishonor and shame and from commercial disaster. \[Applause.\]_ </p>
  <p>_You are now a private citizen, but private employments are closed against you because your name would be used for speculative purposes, and you have refused to permit that. But your country will reward you, never fear. \[Loud applause.\] When Wellington won Waterloo, a battle about on a level with some dozen of your victories, sordid England tried to pay him for that service with wealth and grandeur; she made him a Duke and gave him $4,000,000. If you had done and suffered for any other country what you have done and suffered for your own, you would have been affronted in the same sordid way, but thank God this vast and rich and mighty Republic is imbued to the core with a delicacy which will forever preserve her from so degrading a deserving son. Your country loves you. Your country is proud of you. Your country is grateful to you. \[Applause.\] Her applauses which have been thundering in your ears all these weeks and months, will never cease while the flag you saved continues to wave. \[Great applause.\] Your country stands ready from this day forth to testify her measureless love and pride and gratitude toward you in every conceivable inexpensive way. Welcome to Hartford, great soldier, honored statesman, unselfish citizen. \[Loud and long-continued applause.\]_</p>
  <p> After this introduction Grant took center stage and stated,</p>
  <p>_"Mr. President, and gentlemen of Hartford: I am very proud of the welcomes that I have received at the hands of my fellow-citizens from San Francisco to Boston; but this is the first occasion when I have been thrice welcomed. So much has been said in the three welcomes I have received that it leaves me little to say, except to disagree with the last speaker at to the character of the American people for generosity. \[Gen. Grant thus referred to remarks of Mark Twain substantially to the effect that 'Republics are ungrateful.'\] I recognize their generosity; and what they have given me is more valued than gold or silver. No amount of the latter could compensate for the courtesy and kind feeling with which I have everywhere been received. I feel you have given testimony to that today, and for that I thank you one and all."_</p>
  <p>Once the speeches had commenced Grant and his traveling party boarded carriages and were escorted through the city by over 2,000 veterans and soldiers from all over Connecticut, and almost 3,000 members of the Republican campaign clubs of Hartford and the surrounding area. Several distinguished guests were invited to the home of Mr. James G. Batterson for dinner, followed by a reception at the home of General William H. Bulkeley. To cap off Grant’s visit to the city there was a grand torch-light parade, fireworks, electric lights and torches, and a viewing of the decorations that covered Hartford as thousands of people cheered. Grant made his way to the train depot, leaving on the 10:25 p.m. train for New York, tired yet satisfied.</p>
</div>

<button type="button" class="collapsible">Leisure Activities</button>
<div class="content">
  <p>Both when it was created in the 1850s and now, Bushnell Park acts as the main greenspace in downtown Hartford. The park was originally designed by Swiss-born landscape architect Jacob Weidmann. His plan was to embrace nature with graceful paths leading to scenic views along the meandering Park River. Over the years the park has changed and been redesigned, with the most notable construction being the burial of the park River between 1940 and 1980. </p>
  <p>In Clemens time as well as today, Bushnell Park serves as a place to gather, celebrate, and relax. Whether it is attending a festival, circus, or lecture, or merely taking a walk or having a picnic, Bushnell Park is a prime location. But this begs the question, who gets to partake in these kinds of leisure activities?</p>
  <p>In the Clemens’s era classism, racism, social-economics, and gender expectations dictated every aspect of life, including leisure activities – from who was allowed to go where and with whom to what the proper attire was during those leisure activities. We like to think we’ve come a long way since the 1870s, but similar restrictions still remain today as we as a society continue the battle for human rights and their impacts on our lives. </p>
</div>

<button type="button" class="collapsible">The Pedaling Revolution</button>
<div class="content">
  <p>Bicycling was another favorite summer pastime for both men and women in the Victorian age. According to scholar Dr. Charlotte James: “Bicycles were used for leisure by the upper classes and were a convenient form of transport for the middle and lower classes. However, bicycles came to mean much more for many women and were crucial in them gaining a level of independence. Bicycles allowed women to escape the prying eyes of their household and provided them with an opportunity to exercise. Suddenly, women were able to travel where they wanted when they wanted, giving them a new feeling of self-reliance and freedom.” </p>
  <p>In May 1884 Clemens tried to learn how to ride a bicycle with his Hartford friend, Rev. Joseph Twichell. “Twichell & I have been breaking our necks & bones all the past 7 days trying to learn to ride the bicycle,” he wrote to a friend—“but we have acquired the art, now, & shan’t break anything more.”  </p>
  <p>Clemens was fascinated by technology and inventions and the bicycle was no exception in an era when all kinds of health benefits were ascribed to its use. His bicycle had been built by a company established in Hartford by Albert Pope, a Civil War veteran and bicycle visionary. He wondered “whether Twichell & I will beat the bicycle, or whether the bicycle will beat us.” </p>
  <p> _We have fought the creature a couple of weeks, now, & we have honorable wounds to show for it. This morning we traveled a couple of miles, mainly up hill, —& made it derned uncomfortable for the wagons; for they could never tell just which way we were proposing to steer—& neither could we._ </p>
  <p>Inspired by his failed attempts, Clemens penned the story “Taming the Bicycle.”  </p>
</div>

<button type="button" class="collapsible">Baseball</button>
<div class="content">
  <p>Baseball is considered the national sport of the United States. Fans cheer on their favorite teams with opening day marking the beginning of summer and the World Series championship concluding the season. The Baseball Hall of Fame says: “the first professional baseball games were played in the wake of” the American Civil War and by the 1840s “baseball mania” was in full swing. They go on to say that “from the Civil War to Civil Rights and all points in between and beyond, the game of baseball supports and reflects many aspects of American life, from culture to economics and technological advances. It inspires movements, instills pride and even heals cities.” </p>
   <p>On May 18, 1875, Clemens and his friend Rev. Joseph Twichell took in a baseball game in Hartford—The Hartford Dark Blues versus the Boston Red Stockings. Over the course of the game (which Boston won) Clemens’s brown umbrella went missing, prompting the following newspaper advertisement:   _TWO HUNDRED AND FIVE DOLLARS REWARD – At the great baseball match on Tuesday, while I was engaged in hurrahing, a small boy walked off with an English-made brown silk UMBRELLA belonging to me, and forgot to bring it back. I will pay $5 for the return of that umbrella in good condition to my house on Farmington Avenue. I do not want the boy (in an active state) but will pay two hundred dollars for his remains. SAMUEL L. CLEMENS_ </p>
    <p>Several years later, during a summer stay in Elmira, New York, Clemens went from spectator to participant. He agreed to serve as umpire for the local baseball game as long as he was provided with a chair, fan, umbrella, and a pitcher of ice water. He was to be joined in his duties by friend and fellow umpire, Thomas Beecher, reverend of the Park Church. But Clemens changed his mind, a newspaper reported, saying “he could not make a martyr of himself, notwithstanding the fact that he would be glad to perish in a good cause.” He “used a big fan in a vigorous manner and said that he would encourage the players with his presence, but he must refuse to go out in the sun.” </p>
     <p>Despite his lack of cooperation in that game Clemens vigorously exclaimed, “Baseball...is the very symbol, the outward and visible expression of the drive, and push, and rush and struggle of the raging, tearing, booming nineteenth century!”  Clemens’s appreciation of the sport continued throughout the years, even attending games during his visit to Bermuda in 1908, a couple of years before his death. </p>
</div>
