---
title: Dr. Taft
layout: exhibit
permalink: /digital-exhibition/meet-the-neighbors/dr-taft.html
# include CollectionBuilder info at bottom
credits: false
# Edit the markdown on in this file to describe your collection
# Look in _includes/feature for options to easily add features to the page
parent: meet-the-neighbors
---

{% include feature/image.html objectid="CMCH_1991-60-2" width="75" %}

Some would argue that Cincinnatus Taft became a doctor due to his childhood when he suffered from frequent and unyielding hemorrhages from his lungs. Several doctors told his parents that this was a result of his lungs not working properly and he would likely live six months or less. Thankfully, he greatly exceeded their expectations and decades later found himself in school to become a doctor. Taft graduated from the College of Physicians and Surgeons of New York before moving to Hartford in 1846 to take over his brother Gustavus’ homeopathic practice which he started in 1842.  His office was located at 311 Main Street in downtown. Although he had an office, he often visited the sick at their home as well. Doctors often made house calls in order for the patient to remain comfortable and safe in their own home. This would also allow doctors to survey the environment of the patient and determine if there were potential factors that were contributing to their sickness and could help determine the cause. He was the third homeopathic doctor to settle in Hartford and the seventh in the state of Connecticut.

One of his first interactions as the Clemens family physician was in May of 1872 when they telegraphed ahead of their arrival back to Hartford after spending time with Olivia’s family in Elmira, New York. Their first born and only son, Langdon Clemens, had developed a bad cough and he needed to be looked at. A few days later Langdon was diagnosed with diphtheria and died shortly thereafter, five months shy of his second birthday. Dr. Taft often treated the Clemens family members, whether it was youngest daughter Jean’s scarlet fever or Olivia feeling weak and unwell. He was known to be social despite his busy schedule visiting and serving patients throughout Hartford. He was known to stay twenty or thirty minutes after serving his patient to talk and catch up with them.

The Clemens had a strong relationship with Dr. Taft and when he fell ill himself, Samuel wrote to him: To my poor mind the first of holy callings is the physician’s; & he should walk before the Pope, & Cardinal, & all the priestly tribe, for he heals all that fall in his way, not merely the chance sufferer here & there who is willing to say first, ‘Good Galilean, I subscribe to the conditions.’ And to my mind, first of all the good physicians is our good physician; & to him I & mine send homage & greeting…” Doctors were an integral part of the community and had intimate relationships with many families they treated.

A year later Dr. Taft was ailing once more, and Samuel wrote to him offering to have him carried on a waterbed to their home to escape the noisy celebration of Buckingham Day. The family offered to delay their departure from Hartford for their annual summer trip to Elmira, if they could be in any service to him. Sadly, a few weeks later Dr. Taft died at age 64 due to a stomach ailment. Taft’s widow, Ellen, wrote to Samuel upset about a New York Times article regarding her husband which she felt focused too much on his autopsy. She implored him, “…I want you, who knew, loved, and appreciated him to write something which will be as pleasant to us to read as the one I alluded to was unpleasant. You knew his tender gentle ways in a sick room, the courage he gave his patients to live, as well as the skill that supported that courage, the blessed cleanliness of his person, and of his attire – How the little children loved him, and how he returned this love. All these traits give so much….Isn’t it strange that the world goes on just the same and he out of it—where?” 
