---
title: Clemens' Era Hartford
layout: about
permalink: /digital-exhibition/clemens-era-hartford.html
# include CollectionBuilder info at bottom
credits: false
# Edit the markdown on in this file to describe your collection
# Look in _includes/feature for options to easily add features to the page
---

We think of “Clemens Era Hartford” as the seventeen years the Clemens family lived here. But we have to remember that  Hartford’s growing sophisticated population, dynamic commerce, splendid homes, broad avenues, and natural beauty were already in full swing and were what attracted Samuel and Olivian Clemens to relocate here in 1871. And Hartford continued to grow and thrive after the Clemenses left. 

They came with some financial stability brought by Olivia’s inherited wealth, but they needed to find sustained economic and social stability to raise their growing family and to grow Samuel’s career in writing and lecturing as Mark Twain, a business that was just taking off with the success of his first book, _Innocents Abroad_. Hartford had a booming publishing business for his writing, the “correct” social circles that would come to and solicit his lecture tour, and enough other business opportunities that Samuel could dabble in to earn a little extra on the side. 

Just think… 

Just 8 years before Samuel had been roaming around the west trying to land on a job that would give him money and a place in society, writing to 

Just 6 years before, Samuel was struggling so that he quipped to his brother, “If I do not get out of debt in three months — pistols or poison for one — exit me.”

Just 4 years before, Samuel was working as a reporter and boarded a ship headed to the Holy Land. His writings from this journey would turn into his first published book that got him his first real money.

Just 2 years before Samuel moved up the social ladder by marrying a wealthy progressive daughter of a lumber and coal magnet from Elmira, New York

Now, with some money in the bank, some financial stability brought by his wife’s wealth, Samuel was ready to use his creative drive and hustle mentality to make a place for himself and his family in this city. 

GRID– Union Station (web text)
------------------------------

When Samuel and Olivia Clemens moved to their Hartford House in 1874, they would have been greeted by the city’s first train station, Union Depot. This first station was designed to reflect an Italianate country villa, with arches, towers, and columns. The design was reflective of the opulence of the era and physical manifestation of Hartford’s claim to an elite status. The tracks ran through the center of the building and serviced two lines. Unfortunately, Union Depot was designed with style over substance and soon became too crowded and could not keep up with the demand of the bustling city. 

The second station is the building you still see here today. Hartford’s Union Station opened to the public in 1889 and was designed with function in mind to better serve the growing city. The tracks were moved to a second story level so that they didn’t interfere with the carriage traffic on the streets below. The new station also increased the number of lines being served from two to four, giving the residents of Hartford greater access to locales all over the country. 

For the 17 years that Samuel Clemens lived in Hartford, he was constantly traveling, building his career as a writer and thinker, through a series of lectures that went along with the books he wrote and published. These lectures helped support him and his family financially as a stand alone gig, but also helped sell his books, and more importantly helped to establish Mark Twain as a well known name, and a brand. 

Twain was an innovator in brand extension and brand management.

Twain was very conscious of the word as well as the image.

In his day, Clemens would travel by carriage the one mile from his Nook Farm home to Union Station, here, to catch a train to places near and far. Clemens for one was not a fan of rail travel. He wrote in 1906: “The long railway journey from Dublin last Wednesday destroyed me for 7 whole days! —both mentally & physically; & there’s been heart-burn enough to almost move me to take out a fire-policy.” 

Throughout his life Clemens traveled extensively around the United States and as a keen observer of the people and places around him, he used every encounter as a source material for his creative works. Today we think of Twain as the quintessential American voice, but let’s not forget the abundance of unseen voices that lie behind him, including his wife, daughters, family, friends, servants, business associates, and every random person he found interesting. 

What does it take to be a professional creative? Clemens, through the persona of Mark Twain, was at the forefront of freelance side-hustle culture where creativity and capitalism collided. For Clemens this meant always traveling to the next speaking engagement, looking for the next business opportunity, and being away from his family. 

GRID– American Publishing Company (web text) 
---------------------------------------------

The American Publishing Company , once located at 284 Asylum Street, was founded in Hartford on April 10, 1865, at the very end of the Civil War, in fact only one day after Lee surrendered to Grant. 

The company was established as a subscription-based publishing house, which meant that salesmen sold books door to door using a “salesmen’s prospectus;” a thin, condensed version of the actual book with sample chapters, illustrations, and bindings. After the salesmen presented a customer with the prospectus and made their pitch, they could read a chapter or two, ponder over the drawings, and ultimately decide if they wanted to place an order. If so, they were able to choose which binding and cover they wanted which ranged in price. 

For  _Adventures of Huckleberry Finn_ you could get the cheapest green cloth cover for $2.75 or the most expensive half Morocco with marbled edges for $4.25. (As an aside the average daily wage was $2.00). This method of sales allowed publishing companies to reach more people who did not necessarily have a bookstore nearby to purchase from. 

Once the American Publishing Company designated itself subscription sales only, they got to work putting out three books in the first two years (one of which was the Bible). In 1867, Elisha Bliss joined the company and quickly transformed it into a busy, high functioning endeavor. He embraced new emerging genres along with ones normally ignored by subscription publishers like humor. That led him to invite Mark Twain to write a humorous book about his travels aboard the Quaker City excursion, a 5–6-month journey to Europe and the Holy Lands where Twain detailed sights, sounds, food, people to give a taste back home to Americans who could not afford to make it to these exotic locales. The result was _Innocents Abroad_, Twain’s best-selling book during his lifetime. 

This publication kicked off steady growth for the publishing company which continued through the mid 1880’s. According to scholar R. Kent Rasmussen, “During its first two decades, the company published about 80 books – a huge number for a subscription publisher – by writers including Josh Billings, Bret Harte, Charles Dudley Warner, and Dan De Quille.” Additionally, the company published all of Mark Twain’s major works through 1880: _Roughing It_ (1872), _The Gilded Age_ (1873), _Sketches, New and Old_ (1875), _The Adventures of Tom Sawyer_ (1876), and _A Tramp Abroad_ (1880). Altogether over 300,000 were sold and Mark Twain’s books were the company’s main feature. 

Twain eventually left American Publishing to form his own publishing house called Charles L. Webster & Co, named for Clemens’ niece’s husband. which published _Adventures of Huckleberry Finn_ and General Grant’s famous memoirs among others before shutting down in 1894. By creating his own publishing house Clemens earned dual income as author and publisher, taking advantage of multiple revenue streams. 

Twain also accused the American Publishing Company of cheating him out of thousands of dollars from inaccurate book sale reports, and Clemens’ brother Orion convinced him Bliss was dishonest.  Despite this accusation and the tense relationship that followed, Twain returned to American Publishing to put out _Puddn’head Wilson_ (1894) and _Following the Equator_ (1897). At this point in time, the subscription market was failing, and they were holding on mainly due to selling uniform editions of Mark Twain’s back titles. In 1903, the company was finally sold to Harper’s. 

The success of his first book, _The Innocents Abroad_, is one reason the Clemens came to Hartford —  to be closer to the publisher, be a part of the growing publishing industry in the city, build ties with the business, and keep an eye on the publisher. Clemens ambitions were to get his work into the homes of as many people as possible. Subscription publication ensured that it was cheaper and easier to anyone to read…Clemens once commented, “Anything but subscription publication is printing for private circulation.” Mark Twain’s books were heavily marketed by using this form of sales and publishing.  Salesmen were sent to small towns all over the country to promote and pitch his newest title.

The process from writing a book to getting it published isn’t always a direct line with editors, illustrators, the typesetters, printers, and binders all wanting to get their say in. However, before any of those people got their hands on Clemens’ narratives, his wife Olivia acted as his first editor. Olivia would read through his pages and strike out anything she thought unfit for print. It became a bit of a game between the two, with Clemens adding prose for the pure enjoyment of Olivia’s reaction and inevitable strike out. 

GRID– Case, Lockwood & Brainard (Web text)
------------------------------------------

The [Case, Lockwood, & Brainard Company](https://archives.lib.uconn.edu/node/1475415) was born in the early 19th century in Hartford before mass industry took off. It was founded by resident Newton Case, and he grew his company at the same time Hartford began to prosper as an industrial city. Eventually it became the largest printing company in the state and one of the largest in the entire country. Case had a knack for implementing new technology and pairing it with developing markets for printing industry products.  Unlike the printing giants Harper and Brothers and G.P Putnam and Sons that still exist; Case, Lockwood & Brainard expanded its business to include things like job printing, binding, and blank book production which strayed from its original foundation which focused solely on book publishing.

Case, Lockwood, & Brainard went through various partners (and therefore names) before it finally settled on its final iteration in 1873. Throughout its history the company had success printing dictionaries, Bibles, account books, poetry, textbooks, and ruled notebooks. They also published works for Hartford residents such as Horace Bushnell and Catherine Beecher. The company was often hired for large printing jobs by other sizable publishers due to their successful track record. In 1873, the company was able to secure its own paper mill through the Hartford Paper Company which allowed them to drastically cut costs and put out a more consistent final product.

Case, Lockwood, & Brainard began to outgrow their space in The Old Jail building they had been using as their company headquarters and production center. They rented space nearby while the space was demolished, and their new factory was built in its place at the corner of Trumbull and Pearl streets. The new building was four floors and contained shop and office space. It was designed with various wings in place to divide up the different aspects of their business. For example, bookbinding had its own separate working space. According to scholar Jeffrey Makala, “bookbinding was entirely female, including its supervisors and department head, the new factory layout effectively reinforced the gender separation of tasks common in the American printing in the late nineteenth century.”

 The company was quick to assist other businesses in the community if they were needed. After the _Hartford Times_ newspaper building experienced a fire in its printing shop, they were allowed to set up a press in the basement of the Case, Lockwood, and Brainard building for its workers to use to put out the daily and weekly editions while their workspace was being reconstructed. They did this again in 1888 for the _Evening Post_ when they experienced their own fiery disaster.

Case, Lockwood, & Brainard Company grew with Hartford to become the largest printing company in Connecticut and one of the largest in the country by the turn of the twentieth century. Case, Lockwood, and Brainard worked with Mark Twain and the American Publishing Company to print and bind his books for subscription selling. 

Selling books upon subscription was a clever publishing scheme Clemens used to get his books into the hands of the general public and grow his brand recognition. Instead of buying Twain’s books in a bookstore like we do today, for each book, a salesman would go door to door, showing potential customers sample chapters, and letting them choose their preferred binding option. 

Getting his books into the hands of customers faster and easier was an obsession for Mark Twain. At the time each page of a book was set by hand and then printed through a printing press. In the 1870s & 1880s, Clemens decided to financially support the invention of a typesetting machine called the Paige Compositor, developed by James W. Paige. The goal of this machine was to automate the typesetting and printing processes, thus eliminating a substantial portion of the human workforce in favor of “faster and cheaper” production. Despite Clemens’ $300,000 (a multi-million dollar investment in today’s numbers) the Paige Compositor was a failure and was a large factor in Clemens’ bankruptcy and the family’s move away from Hartford. 

The owners of the printing company, James Lockwood and Newton Case, died in 1888 and 1890 respectively. Case left a large estate behind and divided it evenly between his daughter and the Hartford Theological Seminary. His daughter also received a lifetime lease to his house located in Nook Farm. Leverett Brainard took over as president of the company until his death in 1902. He was succeeded by Connecticut Senator Morgan Bulkeley who quickly hired Leverett’s son, aptly named Newton Case Brainard, a recent Yale graduate. The second Brainard ran the company from 1910 until 1952, even while serving as Hartford’s mayor from 1920-1922. He was also responsible for Hartford’s first airport, named Brainard Field. 

GRID– Allyn House (Web text) 
-----------------------------

If you were to go to 203 Trumbull street in downtown Hartford today you would see a TD Bank location, but back when the Clemenses lived in Hartford, this site at the corner of Trumbull and Asylum was home to the [Allyn House](https://emuseum.chs.org/emuseum/objects/25832/allyn-house-corner-of-asylum-street-and-trumbull-street-ha), one of Hartford’s premier hotels. The imposing four-story hotel had two five-story towers and a 400-seat dining hall that ran the entire length of its west side. ) 

On the one hand the Allyn House was a stop on many of Clemens’ tour schedules as he lectured and promoted his persona of Mark Twain. Despite being a well-known author, Clemens didn’t make enough from selling his books to fully  make ends meet, so speaking on a range of topics from race, class, gender, and politics to his own writings, lecturing played a key role in keeping Clemens and his family financially stable. Twain was in good company lecturing at the Allyn House which was popular with famous visitors to Hartford including President Lincoln in March 1860 and Frederick Douglass in 1864 and 1883.  

During this time period, leisure travel was on the rise. The very idea of taking time to rest was being debated with class, gender, and race all finding their conflicts on who was allowed or expected to take part in leisure activities and travel and when. The Allyn House, along with being a hotel, had a restaurant, a drugstore, a theater hall, and a soda shop that offered “Specialty of Fancy Egg Drinks.” The Allyn House is a prime example of the duality of sustaining Samuel Clemens while creating Mark Twain. CLemens was becoming a part of the society who would stay at the Allyn House while traveling for leisure or at least attend a lecture or dinner party there. But he also was the one performing on stage. While he vehemently denied being an actor, there is no doubt that Clemens was a performer and Mark Twain was his well crafted character. Scholars use Mark Twain as the connection between vaudeville performances of the 1800s and the rise in humorous lectures in the 1900s, arguing that Mark Twain was the first stand-up comedian. Clemens, as Twain, was at the forefront of having a career as a creative, sustaining a celebrity persona, and what today we refer to as “side-hustle culture” when that creative career doesn’t quite meet our basic needs and wants. 

The Allyn House was also where we first meet George Griffin who worked as a waiter at the Allyn House prior to becoming the Clemens’ butler. While Clemens recalled Griffin came one day “to wash some windows and remained half a generation,” it is more likely that the two crossed paths in Hartford, possibly at the Allyn House, and Griffin was recommended for the position of butler. With the ever financially precarious reality of being a working creative, Samuel Clemens had to create and maintain an upper-middle class lifestyle afforded to him by his wife’s social circle and his celebrity image. This lifestyle built the House we celebrate today, but also meant having servants at home, including a butler, like Griffin, cooks, maids, and a coachman.

Griffin on the other hand, as a formerly enslaved person living in the era of reconstruction, embodied side-hustle culture as dictated by the racism of the time. Griffin's “main job” was always “in service” of others, mostly middle to upper class white people, and those jobs did not always pay a living wage. While in Hartford Griffin, thanks to his personality, wits, and skills, was able to create a bookmaker business on the side to help support himself and his family. 

GRID– Case & Rathburn
---------------------

Bolstered by publishing, insurance, and other industries, Hartford in the late 1800s to early 1900s was one of the richest cities in the United States. Case & Rathburn were among the many stores to be found in downtown where one could find goods – from food and home goods, to clothing and novelties.  By examining his check register, we know that the Clemenses bought a dozen custom shirts and 200 cigars from Case & Rathburn in 1874. 

Clemens preferred the cheap cigars and in a 1905 letter to a friend he said, “I know a good cigar better than you do, for I have had sixty years' experience. No, that is not what I mean; I mean I know a bad cigar better than anybody else. I judge by the price only; if it costs above 5 cents, I know it to be …unsmokable.” Smoking cigars was a vice of Clemens, along with cursing and drinking. He often attempted to give his bad habits up as his wife, Olivia, wasn’t fond of the habits, but he could never quite manage to give any of his vices for an extended period of time. 

These habits also became a part of Clemens’ persona of Mark Twain. Smoking cigars in particular became a recognizable affectation of the persona of Mark Twain, so much so that even the modern actor Hal Holbrook (1925-2021) included smoking cigars in his one-man impersonation show “Mark Twain Tonight.” Clemens  deliberately kept his public image to include cigars, along with unruly hair and clothing and later the iconic white suit which he called his “dontcareadam suit.”

Along with his persona of “Mark Twain,” Clemens cleverly created Mark Twain brands and trademarks, including a Mark Twain Scrapbook which did earn Clemens an income for a while and a Mark Twain Memory Building game which never really took off.  According to scholar David Davis, “Before the end of the 19th century, Mark Twain-branded cigars, tobacco insert cards, and flour were for sale here and there around the country. None of these are known to have been specifically authorized by Clemens. Apparently, his practice -- when he was aware of them -- was to tolerate their use of his name if he did not believe the products to impinge on his copyright revenues.”

GRID– Old State House (Web Text)
--------------------------------

State House Square in Hartford was in Clemens’ time and still is today a center of commerce for the city of Hartford. Back in 1874 when Samuel Clemens and his family moved into their Hartford home, this square was THE center of the city hosting both commercial interests and the seat of the government. The square was surrounded by business offices for doctors, merchants, creatives, and government officials, as well as store fronts for a variety of goods and services. We know that both the Clemens family doctor, Dr. Cincinnatus Taft, and a jeweler they bought cufflinks from, D.H. Buell Jewelry, had store fronts and offices on State House Square. 

Built in 1796 the Federal style building you see at the center of this square served as home to all three branches of the Connecticut state government from 1796 to 1878. It was designed by Charles Bulfinch and is the oldest state house in the nation. According to their website: “Major state and national events have, and continue to occur at the Old State House. Lafayette was made a citizen here, many American presidents, including Jackson, Monroe, Johnson, Ford and Bush have visited. President Carter gave the U.S.S. Nautilus to Connecticut in a ceremony at the Old State House in 1981. The trials of Cinque and the Amistad opened here in 1839. P.T. Barnum served in the legislature here, and notables such as Mark Twain, Charles Dickens, Samuel Colt and Harriet Beecher Stowe visited the building.”

Samuel Clemens lived in Hartford between 1872 and 1891, so he also saw the construction of the new capitol, which took seven years to build and cost over $2.5 million. It is located nearby in Bushnell Park and opened for the January 1879 legislative session. Given that the new capitol is on the edge of the 41-acre Bushnell Park, not many businesses followed the government, leaving Old State House Square as a prime location for commerce. 

The Old State House has been restored and is now a National Historic Landmark and operates under a partnership between the Connecticut General Assembly and the Connecticut Democracy Center.  The “new” capitol building is still used today for the state government and is also a National Historic Landmark. 

GRID– Fox & Dow
---------------

Most of the groceries for the Clemens household would come from stores on Asylum Street, Market Street and Central Row near the Old State House. Fox & Dow was one such grocer near State House Square that was frequented by the Clemens staff.  All of the places they bought groceries from were close to the major transportation routes in the city, the railroad and the river, so that the food being sold was as fresh as it could be. 

Olivia. Clemens, George Griffin, and the family’s cook would work together to plan and budget for the family’s meals–both the fancy dinner parties where Samuel Clemens performed as Mark Twain, and the regular three meals a day that a family with growing girls needed. Today we might go to one grocery store and expect to find most of what we need there, but the Clemens family’s cook would need to purchase from several different stores to make one meal, no matter how fancy or homespun. She might visit five or more different people–a greengrocer, a butcher, a fishmonger, a baker, and a dry goods merchant–to get the ingredients to cook one meal. 

The food the Clemenses ate came from all over the world, including just down the road. A meal might be made with flour from the Midwest, turkey from Rhode Island, oysters from Long Island Sound, oranges from Puerto Rico, and potatoes from Paul Thompson’s farm in Parkville. The Gilded Age also saw some significant changes in food technology and transportation that changed how people in the United States cooked and ate. Canned foods were just becoming part of people’s diets when the Clemenses lived in Hartford, making fruits and vegetables more accessible. Even chefs at fancy restaurants like Delmonico’s in New York City were excited at the possibility of being able to cook with good peaches in the winter. Refrigerated rail cars were another brand new technology that had begun to shape how far you could safely transport things like meat and fish.

But how much did all this food cost compared to today? Lots of things were different about the economy in the Gilded Age that make it hard to make direct comparisons, but there are ways to put it into perspective. In 1874, the ingredients alone for one relatively simple five-course meal for Sam & Olivia and four guests could cost anywhere between $10 and $30, perhaps even higher. The family’s cook was paid $240 a year, about $4.60 a week. Since she worked in the house all day, she would have also cooked separate and much simpler meals for herself and the rest of the staff. Others with similar (or lower) wages who didn’t have a job that provided access to meals often ate even more simply, with very little fresh meat or produce. 

GRID– EP & Wm. Kellogg - main street side of Gold Building
----------------------------------------------------------

The brothers William and Edwin Kellogg opened a photography studio in various places along Main Street in Hartford and operated their business for over thirty years, quite a successful feat.  Their studio was known to have the latest and greatest developments and advancements in photography. The topics and subjects they photographed varied from distinguished Hartford residents like Mark Twain to industrial photography at the Hartford factory, Woodruff & Beach, to document the completion of the engine for the USS Kearsarge launched in 1861 for the Union navy during the beginning of the Civil War. 

Not only did the Kellogg brothers photograph Mark Twain, but also the exterior of his interesting and intriguing home on Farmington Avenue. He may have recommended the Kelloggs to his good friend Reverend Joseph Twichell who also sat to have his image taken by the duo. 

Photography at this time was a new technology and not yet recognized as a “true” art form. It wasn’t always trusted to be real or an accurate depiction of the world with some questioning if what they were seeing was manipulated in some way. Sound familiar? During the Civil War photograph was used to show the grim reality of war, death and destruction to the masses not on the front lines. Civil War photographer Matthew Brady is considered the first “famous photographer” and helped start to elevate and promote the art form. During the Gilded Age, the period after the war, wealthy people started to use this technology to document their lives, homes, and place in the world. Quickly photography started to replace the “noble arts” of drawing, painting, and sculpture to document the likeness of the wealthy. And as photography technology advanced, it became cheap and fast enough that even the non-wealthy masses were able to have their photograph taken. There was a rapid increase in visual evidence of the people, landscape, and built world, that today we can thank for selfies, food photography, and the “snapshots” we take on vacation. 

Clemens was an early adopter, sitting for portraits and candid shots with almost every major photographer of the era. Also had images taken of his home and family life to accompany articles about him in Harper’s Bazaar and other magazines and newspapers. Clemens, ever the hustler though, grasped the power of a carefully crafted image and quickly established a visual brand for Mark Twain in the public mind. 

GRID– George Griffin’s Apartment
--------------------------------

If you were to go to 132 Wells Street today you’d see a high-rise building containing luxury apartments. Back in 1874, we would have been standing near 132 Wells Street looking at a boarding house where George Griffin and his first wife Rhoda lived. In 1870 Hartford was a booming industrial city with a population of 37,743, which more than doubled to 79,850 by 1900. The majority of this population were working class people, like George and Rhoda Griffin, who manned the factories, stores, and homes of Hartford and the surrounding area. Many of those workers lived in boarding houses–shared houses with separate rooms for families and individuals–often with a housekeeper and cook to provide basic services for those who worked long hours in businesses and homes around the city.

While the street has changed and Hartford is no longer as industrialized or bustling in the way it used to be, it isn’t hard to imagine blocks of boarding houses throughout Hartford as people of similar cultures or backgrounds grouped together to work hard, support each other, and make ends meet. George Griffin had a wife and child to support, and though he was paid by the Clemens family for his work as a butler in their house, he also maintained side businesses to make ends meet and provide a good life for his family. Griffin was known around town as a bookmaker. He used his place in the Clemens household to listen and collect information that he then turned that knowledge into the basis for the spread on which he’d take bets on for a particular event. He also frequented the Charter Oak Park which opened in 1873 and was home to one of the best-known racetracks in New England at the time. The mile-long track was designed for harness racing, a type of horse racing where the driver sits on a two-wheeled sulky attached to the horse by a harness. 

John O’Neil, the Clemenses’ second gardener, cultivated flowers in the family’s greenhouse, both for the Clemenses’ use, but also to sell on the side to bring in extra cash. O’Neil was known throughout Hartford for his flowers, winning awards at local flower shows for his blooms. His side work not only helped provide for him and his wife, but also helped to elevate the Clemenses status of having an award-winning gardener. 

In contrast, the Clemenses lived out of the city. Out of the heat, smoke, and grime often associated with any city in this time period due to the trains and commercial traffic. They lived in a 25-room mansion with acres of land around them. And they had servants who worked all day in the Clemens’s house, only to return to their own homes at the end of the day and do all the same labor for themselves. The Clemenses had the luxury of entering the city center when it suited their needs and having an employee go in their stead if it didn’t. The Clemenses also had the luxury of leisure travel to “get away” from the city, take in the airs, or connect with nature when they desired; they of course did not have an employer clocking their hours. 

GRID– Brown, & Gross booksellers 
---------------------------------

In 1878 at 79 Asylum Street Brown & Gross Booksellers and Stationers were next door neighbors to clothiers Covey & Smith, later Smith, White & Co. Brown & Gross moved its location around the city several times and additionally went through several name changes throughout its long history.

It started in 1835 and lasted until 1993 when it closed down permanently under the name of Huntington’s. In 1846 the partners and owners at the time, Brown and Parsons, moved their business in 1846 to the corner of Main and Asylum streets. Parsons left the business only a few years later in 1852, while Flavius Brown remained at the helm. He was joined by William Gross in 1858, forming Brown & Gross. According to scholar Dan Sterner, at this location on March 6, 1860, Abraham Lincoln, an avid reader, visited the store after making a speech the night before in the city. While visiting the bookstore he met with Connecticut Republican Gideon Welles, who would later become the Secretary of the Navy in Lincoln’s administration.

In 1869 the store moved to 77-79 Asylum Street and is the location where Mark Twain would often visit. He spent time entertaining Brown & Gross in the backroom telling various stories or humorous tales not meant for polite society. In fact, one customer called them, “unsuitable for Sunday school.”

Flavius Brown was also the treasurer for the city of Hartford and worked from his office located in the back of the bookstore. Brown’s attention was diverted from focusing on the book industry and led to William Gross being responsible for the day-to-day operations and management of the company. Despite Brown’s death in 1880, and Gross taking on a new partner, Leverett Belknap, they decided to keep the name unchanged. It remained so until Gross’s death in 1891 when it no longer would go by its now decades old moniker and was renamed Belknap and Warfield to reflect the new ownership. Belknap first began his career at Brown & Gross in 1864 at just thirteen years old.

Throughout its time in Hartford, it was considered the place to go to purchase books and stationery. It was often visited by local luminaries of the time including Harriet Beecher Stowe, Charles Dudley Warner, Horace Bushnell, Lydia Sigourney, Joseph Twichell, William Gillette, and of course Mark Twain. 

GRID– Brown, Thompson, & Co and clothing in general
---------------------------------------------------

How do you get the clothes that you wear each day? Perhaps you wear hand-me-downs, or get them from a store—maybe you order clothing that comes to you from another place. Maybe you even make clothing yourself, cutting fabric and sewing it together. Today, clothing can come from many different places—and in the 19th century, things were not as different as you might think.

Here in Hartford, Samuel Clemens and his family purchased both clothing and the materials to make clothing—they even brought clothing to be mended, or repaired, so that they could wear it for longer. The family took several articles of clothing—some caps, cloaks, and coats—to be repaired at Strong & Woodruff (355 Main Street). 

On the same street, they also purchased new things. From William H. Bulkeley’s Main Street store, they purchased 2 pairs of gloves. At the 364 Main Street shop Haynes & Simmons, they purchased some new red boots and slippers, as well as new buttons and trimmings to re-make other clothing they already owned. Up Main Street a little further, at Brown, Thompson & Co., they once purchased 56 yards of cotton—that’s over 150 feet of fabric! It’s possible that they bought this fabric for the family’s ladies' maid, Katy Leary, to sew nightgowns, chemises, and petticoats. She would’ve done this sewing on a Singer Sewing Machine, a company that is still well known today—her sewing machine was purchased at 5 Allyn House Block, right here in Hartford. 

But with Katy Leary having other work to do in the Clemens’ home, she couldn’t have sewn everything the family needed—so they went to local dressmakers and tailors, such as RF Martin at 374 Main Street. The family paid for the fabric and the labor of having 2 dresses, a drape, and a cape made. 

But what about ordering clothing? If there was something they couldn’t get in Hartford, or perhaps had a larger variety of options elsewhere, they might look at a catalog and place an order—just like you might look at a catalog or browse a website today. 

GRID– Hartford Courant – formerly 14 Pratt St.
----------------------------------------------

Now the longest continuously running newspaper in the United States, The Hartford Courant was already a well-established pillar of the city when it was based at 14 Pratt St., where Samuel Clemens, known professionally as Mark Twain, would have found it. It was first founded in 1764 by Thomas Green as The Connecticut Courant. Over the following decades it evolved, experimenting with new names and formats under different leadership. In 1867, former Civil War general and politician Joseph Hawley, leading the Hartford Evening Press purchased the paper that The Connecticut Courant had become, The Hartford Daily Courant. He merged his two papers to make The Hartford Courant that we know today. Author Charles Dudley Warner joined him as co-editor. During their leadership, the Courant became one of the most well-known newspapers not only in the state but the nation.

When Samuel Clemens first came to Hartford in 1868, he pursued a partnership in the Courant. He wanted to join with Hawley and Warner, both residents of the influential and affluent Nook Farm neighborhood of Hartford he longed to enter. He was preparing to marry Olivia Langdon, a woman from Elmira, New York far wealthier than he was. In marrying her, he was quite dramatically shifting in class. A partnership in the Courant would have allowed his career to follow that shift while keeping him in the industry he’d worked so long in, from working as a teenage printer’s apprentice in Missouri to a reporter based in California. Ultimately, he was too much of an unknown to Hawley and Warner and the partnership fell through. However, the connections he made lasted. In 1873, Samuel and Charles Dudley Warner published a novel together, Samuel’s first, The Gilded Age. The title came to exemplify the era they lived in, one characterized by economic disparity, the extreme economic disparity, exploitation, and corruption.

When Samuel and his wife Olivia finally moved to Hartford and Nook Farm in the early 1870s, the Courant integrated them with the new community around them. In 1871, while still renting a house and years before building their own, the family’s check register records them posting an ad for domestic staff. Another entry in 1873 lists them posting an ad looking for a lost pocketbook. Still others show them purchasing subscriptions to the Courant. Through all of these exchanges, they both gained and shared information from and with the broader city, using it to communicate as well as stay connected to current events, market news, and gossip. And each of these monetary transactions, one by one and in tandem with many others, embedded them into a network of financial exchange that included all the trade, industry, and labor that made up Hartford. 

Through that ad for new staff, The Courant connected the Clemenses with their potential employees. While that specific ad has not been identified, many members of the Hartford workforce would have looked for and found employment in the pages of The Courant. So too many job hopefuls have advertised that they were looking for work. One of these ads from May 8, 1879, from a black man living at 132 Wells St., who’d been in his current position for four years and was looking for work as a coachman, may even have been posted by George Griffin, who the Clemenses employed as a butler from 1874 to 1891 in a moment that he was interested in other options. He likely lived at that address and would fit the description. Another Clemens employee found his name in the paper, gardener John O’Neill, after receiving praise at an 1889 meeting of the Horticultural Society for his cinerarias and roses. These staff members would have been just as interconnected to the city through the Courant as their employers.

Samuel found himself the subject of a great deal of reporting. Over his years in Hartford, Mark Twain became one of the most recognized American names.  The Courant delighted in reporting on the comings and goings and public appearances of one of its most famous locals. This media attention, as well that of countless other newspapers and magazines, helped transform “Mark Twain” from simply the pen name of an author and public speaker into a persona, the eccentric performer and comic rocketed from humble origins to fame and notoriety, separate from Samuel Clemens, the husband, father, and friend. That fame spread to sometimes encompass those around him. The Courant highlighted, in covering the deaths of both Olivia Susan Clemens, his daughter, and Patrick McAleer, his coachman, their connection to the famous Twain and his interest in their passing. These deaths were the tragedies the family and friends Susy and Patrick left behind, but, since that included Mark Twain, they were everybody’s tragedies. 

The Courant also became one of Samuel’s experiments. He was a major investor in James Paige’s Paige Compositor, a typesetting machine supposed to revolutionize the printing industry, largely by automating jobs. Samuel proposed to Paige that they use the typesetters at the Courant to identify the speed they worked at which Compositor would need to beat. He suggested a contest among the typesetters for a cash prize but with the purpose concealed, knowing they’d be far less likely to participate if they knew the goal was to eliminate their jobs. Ultimately, with only two compositors fully constructed and many malfunctions, the endeavor was a failure. Paige was only one of several working towards his goal. He found himself outcompeted by more practical machines that ultimately succeeded where his had failed to overhaul the labor landscape of printing and, by extension, newspapers like the Courant.

GRID– Talcott Street Church –950 Main Street 
---------------------------------------------

In 1819 a group of African Americans living in Hartford were tired of having to sit in the back of churches and given assigned seating in galleries. They decided they would worship on their own terms and started in a small conference room of the First Church of Christ, now Center Church. They became the first Black Congregational Church in the state and the third oldest in the country. A year later they moved to a building on State Street and formed “The African American Religious Society of Hartford.” Plans began to find a new house of worship where all were welcomed, and seating was wherever one chose. Eventually they purchased a property at the corner of Talcott and Market streets and built a stone and brick church. It was the epicenter for Hartford’s Black community and a meeting place for abolitionists and the social movements that emerged during the period. Additionally, the church realized they needed to educate their members in order to help them succeed and therefore established a school district where Black children could learn how to read and write; the only place they could do so for many years.

One of its most prominent early pastors was a man named Dr. James W.C. Pennington, a former fugitive enslaved man who escaped from Maryland via the Underground Railroad. The fear of being returned to enslavement stayed with him for years until Harriet Beecher Stowe’s brother-in-law, John Hooker, procured his freedom for $150. He received his freedom papers on June 3, 1851. His Bible remains at the church today.

Mark Twain gave a reading at Hartford’s Unity Hall on May 22, 1889, as a fundraiser and benefit for the Talcott Street Church who were trying to raise money for a new organ. His performance and readings included, “[On the Decay of the Art of Lying,](https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/2572/pg2572-images.html)” and “[How I Escaped Being Killed in a Duel](https://www.loa.org/news-and-views/1896-mark-twain-8220how-i-escaped-being-killed-in-a-duel8221/),” among others.  

By 1860 the church was renamed the Talcott Street Congregational Church and remained so until 1953 when it joined the congregation from Mother Bethel Methodist to form Faith Congregational Church, the name it goes by still. 

GRID– Hartford Ice Company– pearl street side of Gold Building
--------------------------------------------------------------

Today, Ice is something we take for granted and don’t think too much about. We get it in bags from the store, fill trays from the tap to put in our freezer, or they come straight from our refrigerator door. But back in the Clemens era, ice was a luxury, especially in summer months. And having ice-formed treats at dinner parties was an even higher symbol of status. 

Refrigeration and freezing technologies advanced in stages, but for the first couple thousand years of human existence ice was harvested from nature rather than a human produced product. When rivers and lakes would freeze in the winter, enterprising humans would cut blocks of ice out and store it in naturally cool places like caves or human-made storage structures called ice-wells. This meant that people in climates that allowed for freezing water had ice throughout the winter and maybe into spring; but those in warmer climates or many places in the summer and fall didn’t have access to ice. 

In the early 1800s, about 30 years before Samuel Clemens was born, a businessman from Massachusetts named Frederick Tudor decided to try to transport, store, and sell ice on a larger scale. It took a bit of trial and error, but fairly quickly, New England merchants were shipping ice all over the country and the world.

Since the Connecticut River is one of those bodies of water that froze each winter, ice companies were prevalent in this area. According to an article in the Hartford Courant, the Hartford Ice Company was formed in November 1863 “with a capital of fifty thousand dollars, to furnish ice during the warm season of the year at the lowest possible figure. Mr. J.R. Phillips, a pioneer in the business, is the largest shareholder.” 

Businesses like the Hartford Ice Company owned sections of the river, ponds, and/or lakes. They also had store houses called “ice-houses” that were designed to help slow the melting process. Then they had to have ways to transport the ice to customers near and far so train cars, carriages, and wagons were employed.  The Hartford Ice Company’s offices moved a number of times but in 1873 the Clemenses purchased 57.5 lbs of ice from the company between January 7th and May 2nd and sent the check for $23 to the office's location here at 13 Pearl Street.

Once delivered to a customer, it was up to them to use or store the ice. You had to be rather wealthy to have your own ice-well or even better your own ice-box. Ice-boxes of the late 1800s are the precursors to the refrigerators we have in our own homes today, and had the same purpose – to use ice to preserve food. Families like the Clemenses paid for ice by the pound and orders varied on how much could fit in the refrigerator, what you needed it for, how often you wanted a delivery, and what time of year it was. 

For instance, in November and December 1872, the Clemenses bought 21.25 pounds of ice–about 10.6 pounds of ice per month. From January through April of 1873, they bought 57.5 pounds of ice–about 14.4 pounds of ice per month. We don’t know for sure, but it’s likely that they bought more of that ice in March and April when it was warmer. 

Being able to buy ice all year round, store it, and use it for food storage and preparation was a luxury only the upper classes could afford. As such ice actually played an integral role in the social status of the Clemens family and in the developing persona of Mark Twain. As an upper-middle class family and a growing celebrity, Samuel Clemens and Olivia Clemens as well as Mark Twain were expected to entertain friends, family, business associates, and acquaintances. This meant having lavish dinner parties multiple times a week, serving the best fresh foods, and awing guests with rare treats such as ice-cream. Clemens, as himself and as Twain, had to balance his financial instability with the high demands of being a public figure. 

GRID– D.H. Buell Jewelry/Dwight Buell (1833-1889) 
--------------------------------------------------

A section of Hartford, known as Statehouse Square, was a center of commerce with stores and business offices of all kinds focused around the then/former center of government. Dwight H. Buell's Jewelry shop which, according to the 1881 Geer's Hartford City Directory was located on 54 High Street, was one such business. 

Dwight H. Buell was a jeweler, silversmith, and watchmaker in the city of Hartford who ended up with a role in the financial calamity that forced the Clemens family to leave the city permanently. Buell was the go-to for any jewelry needs whether that be necklaces, watches, rings, clocks, cufflinks, etc. and dabbled in investments as well. The Clemens family purchased from his shop often, and their receipts over the years include items like combs, clocks, mounting for mosaic pin, and eyeglass repairs. In his autobiography in 1890 Clemens reminisced about his friendship with Buell and how it led to one of the biggest mistakes of his lifetime:

_Ten or eleven years ago, Dwight Buell, a jeweler, called at our house and was shown up to the billiard room --- which was my study; and the game got more study than the other sciences. He wanted me to take some stock in a type-setting machine. He said it was at the Colt Arms factory, and was about finished. I took $2,000 of the stock. I was always taking little chances like that; and almost always losing by it too – a thing which I did not greatly mind, because I was always careful to risk only such amounts as I could easily afford to lose._

The Paige Compositor was the name of the aforementioned type-setting machine and Clemens believed in it and put his money behind it. It required over 18,000 moveable parts and never worked properly. He became frustrated with the inventor, James Paige, and snarked, “What a talker he is. He could persuade a fish to come out and take a walk with him. When he is present I always believe him – I cannot help it. When he is gone away all the belief evaporates. He is a most daring and majestic liar.” Instead of revolutionizing the printing industry it failed miserably and cost Clemens not only tons of money, but the safety, security, and happiness of the life they had built together in Hartford.  

One jewelry purchase made by the Clemenses from Buell’s shop were a pair of topaz cufflinks which are in the Museum’s collections today, still in their original hinged box with Buell's business stamped into the lining of the box top. We believe topaz was selected as it is the birthstone of November and both Clemens and his wife Olivia have birthdays in that month. 

These cufflinks with their large and dare we say gaudy topaz jewels are a symbol of both Clemens’ prosperity as well as his financial decline. Now whether these jewels were purchased through Olivia’s family wealth or due to Clemens’ success as a writer, publisher, and lecturer (or from any of this other side hustles), we do not know. But to be able to afford such a luxury item and then the privilege of wearing them about town nods to at least a time of financial stability for the family. However, Dwight Buell was associated with James Paige and was one person who encouraged Clemens to invest in Paige's typesetting machine, which ultimately contributed to financial ruin for the Clemenses. Which leads one to wonder how much of a gilded façade were these cufflinks to Clemens’ true financial stability?

Buell died in 1889 at the age of 55; just a couple of years before the Clemens family had to move out of their beloved home due to the failure of the Paige Compositor and a devastating loss of money.

GRID– Paige Compositor 
-----------------------

Ever since humans created written languages, there have been different methods for writing those languages down. Words have been carved into stone, written on walls with natural pigments or paints, written on papers with inks or pencil. All of those methods are done by hand, and each copy of a document or book would have to be written individually, so it took a lot of time, effort, and money to create multiple copies of anything.

It wasn’t until the invention of a machine called a printing press that mass production of flyers, posters, books, and newspapers became easier and cheaper. The first use of a printing press was in China and the first book produced with the press dates to 868 C.E.--over a thousand years ago. The Chinese continued to improve upon the technology in their country, but in Europe, printing technology wasn’t available until 1440 when a man named Johannes Guttenberg developed his printing press. Today we have computers and modern printers, but back in the Clemenses’ time, Samuel would have to write his stories out by hand, or use a typewriter, and then rely on a publishing company with printing presses to make copies of his books for sale. He couldn’t just print off a bunch of copies the way we would today. 

With early printing presses, each page of text would have to be manually laid out using small wooden or metal blocks each with either a letter, symbol, or space on them. These blocks were arranged to form the text to be printed on the page, inked, and then passed through the printing press with a piece of paper to create the typed page. For each page the process had to be repeated and eventually you’d have a complete book or newspaper.

At age 11, Samuel Clemens left school and started his first job as a printer’s apprentice. He set type for a local newspaper. He would sit at a table with a cabinet much like this one here and layout all the letters for the newspaper page. This cabinet is called a type case, and in the drawers are a bunch of compartments to sort and store each letter and symbol that could be used on a page. What we now refer to as upper-case and lower-case letters got their name by where they were located in the case. Upper-case letters were located near the top and lower-case letters near the bottom. Clemens loved the printing process and called printing “the noblest of all arts, and destined in the ages to come to promote the others and preserve them.”

James Paige was trying to invent a machine that could automate the typesetting process – so instead of a person having to place each letter block by hand, the Paige Compositor was supposed to set the type for you – more like a typewriter would–if you typed the text in here. It was supposed to produce many copies in a short period of time, making the printing process cheaper and faster . Unfortunately, this machine never worked. It was too complicated, the parts kept jamming, and other inventors came up with better ways to accomplish the same goals. For instance, the Thorne typesetting machine was invented here in Hartford around the same time Paige was working on his machine, and it worked a lot better! 

Samuel loved technology and around 1880 he started investing in this machine, which means he gave James Paige money to help him develop his invention. As an investor, Samuel didn’t just supply money, he also had a lot of experience working in printing that he was happy to share with Paige. There are many letters between Samuel and James Paige discussing all aspects of the compositor– the design, its potential uses, the costs, the speed, and more.

In one 1886 letter, Samuel asks Paige how his machine’s capabilities compared to what skilled workers could do with the methods that already existed. After all, if the machine couldn’t do this work faster or more accurately than people, why would any printer want to buy it? Samuel proposed a competition that would test the skills of human typesetters, so Paige would know what he was up against. He suggested using the typesetters who worked at the main newspaper here in the city, the Hartford _Courant._

_**To James W. Paige 16 August 1886 • Elmira, N.Y.**_ 

 _Dear Mr. Paige:_

_At last I know how to settle the vexed question of how many_ _ems per hour is good average work, both setting and distributing._

_Does the Courant use any minion?—for that is much the best size for the experiment. Go to Mr. Hubbard of & ask him to assemble all his force some afternoon for a trial of speed—ostensibly at somebody else’s desire, not yours. You don’t want to be known in it. Give all the men the same_ _paragraph—of reprint—a paragraph containing just 500 ems SOLID, &_ _have only one break-line, & that the last one._ 

_$15 or $20 will find out, once & for good, all we want to know. Inquire how many men there are, & leave with Hubbard 25 cents for each;_ _& $11 besides, for prizes__._ _Charge to me._

You may have noticed that Sam told Paige to make sure the men in this competition didn’t know he was behind it. 

One of the reasons people were trying to invent or invest in machines like the Paige Compositor was that they hoped those machines would help them make more money by reducing how much it cost them to produce books and newspapers in the first place. Many things went into how much it cost to print books and newspapers–paper, ink, type, renting space for the print shop itself–but one of the biggest costs was the money you paid people to do the challenging and high-pressure work of setting all of this type! If Paige could get his compositor working the way he wanted to, he’d be able to sell it to newspapers like the Hartford Courant. The Courant would then be able to use the machine instead of paying all of those people. If the typesetters knew this little competition was actually helping a man who was trying to invent a machine that would put them out of their jobs, they probably wouldn’t have wanted to participate–even for a cash prize!

But the machine wouldn’t work–and wouldn’t sell–if it couldn’t do at least as well as skilled typesetters. Rather than guess, Samuel wanted to help Paige find out exactly what his invention needed to beat to be successful, but given his own experience doing this job, he was able to guess at what the Hartford typesetters would be able to produce.

Only two Paige Compositor machines were ever fully built and neither went beyond the testing phase.  A New York Evening Telegram article called it “Marvelously ingenious and perfect, from a mechanical standpoint; worthless commercially, the costliest machine ever built.” What really sank the Paige Compositor was that other inventions managed to do what it did not — make printing cheaper and faster than using skilled typesetters AND basically “get on the shelf” for people to buy. In particular, as Paige was still testing and tweaking his machine, its competitor, the Mergenthaler Linotype machine, invented in 1886, was already being used at the big-name publishers and newspapers. 

Because of his investment in the Paige Compositor, its failure meant Samuel lost thousands of dollars (what today would be millions), had to file bankruptcy, sell his Hartford home, and move to Europe. The second machine, built in 1894, was sold as scrap metal during World War II. The original 1887 model is here, in the galleries of the Mark Twain House for you to see on your next visit to the museum.

GRID– Bushnell Park – (Web text)
--------------------------------

Bushnell Park is the main greenspace in downtown Hartford and it was purposefully created to be so. In the 1850s Hartford was a booming town full of economic success that brought people here to work in a variety of industries including publishing, insurance, banking, munitions, and manufacturing. During this time of rapid industrialization was also a movement to bring curated pockets of nature into cities, like Central Park in New York City. 

When Hartford decided to add their own park, they did contact Frederick Law Olmstead, a Hartford Native and friend of Dr. Horace Bushnell, who was pushing for the park’s creation. Unfortunately, Olmstead was busy with Central Park, but recommended Swiss-born landscape architect and botanist Jacob Wedinman for the job. 

Wedinman was hired and according to the Bushnell Park Conservancy: Weidenmann’s plan of 1861 had a distinctive natural style, which featured smoothly sculpted contours and graceful paths leading to focal points like the meandering Park River. The plan included informal clusters of evergreen and deciduous trees, which screened the sites and sounds of the city, a departure from the formal New England square or central green.

As part of the plan, Weidenmann selected 157 varieties of [Trees](https://bushnellpark.org/attractions/champion-trees/) and shrubs from North America, Europe and eastern Asia to grace the park. A total of 1,100 individual specimens were planted, creating a canopy of green covering the Park. Over the years, many important architectural features, such as the [Soldiers & Sailors Memorial Arch](https://bushnellpark.org/attractions/soldiers-sailors-memorial-arch/) (1886), [the Capitol](https://bushnellpark.org/attractions/state-capitol/) (1876), [Corning Fountain](https://bushnellpark.org/attractions/corning-fountain/) (1899), [the Carousel](https://bushnellpark.org/history/the-carousel/) (1974) and the [Performance Pavilion](https://bushnellpark.org/attractions/performance-pavilion/) (1995) were added, while other scenic elements, such as the [Park River](https://bushnellpark.org/history/the-park-river/) and its several graceful bridges, were demolished in the 1940s.

### TOGGLE —Twain and Grant in Bushnell

On October 14, 1880, Samuel Clemens made his way by train to Boston to meet the former commanding general of the U.S. Army and former U.S. President, Ulysses S. Grant. Clemens made the journey to accompany Grant to Hartford where he was slated to speak on behalf of the Republican presidential nominee that year, James A. Garfield. Grant considered, and eventually desired, a third term in office, however, he did not secure enough votes at the convention and fell short. In order to help support his party Grant traveled throughout the country to stump Garfield by making appearances and speeches. Many Hartford families prepared for the former President’s arrival by decorating their homes and businesses in a patriotic and festive manner. The Clemens family spent fifty dollars at Fox, Brusselars & Co.  to decorate their own residence for the occasion. Clemens and Grant arrived in Hartford on Friday so they could rest and prepare for the following day’s festivities. During their journey to Connecticut’s capital city they made a stop in Putnam and Willimantic. At the Willimantic Linen Company the 1,500 employees gathered in front of their new mill and welcomed Grant for his brief visit. They presented him with a cabinet containing various threads that were manufactured at the company’s mills. Before departing, various other prominent Hartford figures including General Joseph Hawley and author Charles Dudley Warner joined the final leg of the journey. They arrived in Hartford at noon and took carriages to the Allyn House to gather together before making their way to Bushnell Park where the crowds waited in anticipation. The city was almost at a standstill with most businesses closed and throngs of citizens filling the streets to catch a glimpse of their famous guest. The decorations filled downtown Hartford along the procession’s planned route and even elsewhere. The event’s kickoff consisted of a parade of five thousand which included marching bands, military companies, and various dignitaries. This was followed by a luncheon and formal reception, where Clemens delivered a welcome speech and introduced the honored guest on a stand in Bushnell Park.

Clemens spoke as follows:

_GENERAL GRANT: I also am deputized to welcome you to the sincere and cordial hospitalities of Hartford, the city of the historic and revered Charter Oak, of which the most of this town is built. \[Laugher.\] At first it was proposed to have only one speaker to welcome you, but this was changed because it was feared that, considering the shortness of the crop of speeches this year, if anything occurred to prevent that speaker from delivering his speech you would feel disappointed. \[Laughter and applause.\] I desire at this point to refer to your past history. By years of colossal labor and colossal achievement, you at last beat down a gigantic rebellion and saved your country from destruction. Then the country commanded you to take the helm of State. You preferred your great office of General of the Army, and the rest and comfort which it afforded, but you loyally obeyed and relinquished permanently the ample and well-earned salary of the Generalship, and resigned your accumulating years to the chance mercies of a precarious existence. \[Applause.\] By this present fatiguing progress through the land you are mightily contributing toward saving your country once more, this time from dishonor and shame and from commercial disaster. \[Applause.\]_ 

_You are now a private citizen, but private employments are closed against you because your name would be used for speculative purposes, and you have refused to permit that. But your country will reward you, never fear. \[Loud applause.\] When Wellington won Waterloo, a battle about on a level with some dozen of your victories, sordid England tried to pay him for that service with wealth and grandeur; she made him a Duke and gave him $4,000,000. If you had done and suffered for any other country what you have done and suffered for your own, you would have been affronted in the same sordid way, but thank God this vast and rich and mighty Republic is imbued to the core with a delicacy which will forever preserve her from so degrading a deserving son. Your country loves you. Your country is proud of you. Your country is grateful to you. \[Applause.\] Her applauses which have been thundering in your ears all these weeks and months, will never cease while the flag you saved continues to wave. \[Great applause.\] Your country stands ready from this day forth to testify her measureless love and pride and gratitude toward you in every conceivable inexpensive way. Welcome to Hartford, great soldier, honored statesman, unselfish citizen. \[Loud and long-continued applause.\]_

 After this introduction Grant took center stage and stated,

_"Mr. President, and gentlemen of Hartford: I am very proud of the welcomes that I have received at the hands of my fellow-citizens from San Francisco to Boston; but this is the first occasion when I have been thrice welcomed. So much has been said in the three welcomes I have received that it leaves me little to say, except to disagree with the last speaker at to the character of the American people for generosity. \[Gen. Grant thus referred to remarks of Mark Twain substantially to the effect that 'Republics are ungrateful.'\] I recognize their generosity; and what they have given me is more valued than gold or silver. No amount of the latter could compensate for the courtesy and kind feeling with which I have everywhere been received. I feel you have given testimony to that today, and for that I thank you one and all."_

 Once the speeches had commenced Grant and his traveling party boarded carriages and were escorted through the city by over 2,000 veterans and soldiers from all over Connecticut, and almost 3,000 members of the Republican campaign clubs of Hartford and the surrounding area. Several distinguished guests were invited to the home of Mr. James G. Batterson for dinner, followed by a reception at the home of General William H. Bulkeley. To cap off Grant’s visit to the city there was a grand torch-light parade, fireworks, electric lights and torches, and a viewing of the decorations that covered Hartford as thousands of people cheered. Grant made his way to the train depot, leaving on the 10:25 p.m. train for New York, tired yet satisfied. 

### TOGGLE —Leisure Activities

Both when it was created in the 1850s and now, Bushnell Park acts as the main greenspace in downtown Hartford. The park was originally designed by Swiss-born landscape architect Jacob Weidmann. His plan was to embrace nature with graceful paths leading to scenic views along the meandering Park River. Over the years the park has changed and been redesigned, with the most notable construction being the burial of the park River between 1940 and 1980. 

In Clemens time as well as today, Bushnell Park serves as a place to gather, celebrate, and relax. Whether it is attending a festival, circus, or lecture, or merely taking a walk or having a picnic, Bushnell Park is a prime location. But this begs the question, who gets to partake in these kinds of leisure activities?

In the Clemens’s era classism, racism, social-economics, and gender expectations dictated every aspect of life, including leisure activities – from who was allowed to go where and with whom to what the proper attire was during those leisure activities. We like to think we’ve come a long way since the 1870s, but similar restrictions still remain today as we as a society continue the battle for human rights and their impacts on our lives. 

### TOGGLE —The Pedaling Revolution 

Bicycling was another favorite summer pastime for both men and women in the Victorian age. According to scholar Dr. Charlotte James: “Bicycles were used for leisure by the upper classes and were a convenient form of transport for the middle and lower classes. However, bicycles came to mean much more for many women and were crucial in them gaining a level of independence. Bicycles allowed women to escape the prying eyes of their household and provided them with an opportunity to exercise. Suddenly, women were able to travel where they wanted when they wanted, giving them a new feeling of self-reliance and freedom.” 

In May 1884 Clemens tried to learn how to ride a bicycle with his Hartford friend, Rev. Joseph Twichell. “Twichell & I have been breaking our necks & bones all the past 7 days trying to learn to ride the bicycle,” he wrote to a friend—“but we have acquired the art, now, & shan’t break anything more.”  

Clemens was fascinated by technology and inventions and the bicycle was no exception in an era when all kinds of health benefits were ascribed to its use. His bicycle had been built by a company established in Hartford by Albert Pope, a Civil War veteran and bicycle visionary. He wondered “whether Twichell & I will beat the bicycle, or whether the bicycle will beat us.” 

 _We have fought the creature a couple of weeks, now, & we have honorable wounds to show for it. This morning we traveled a couple of miles, mainly up hill, —& made it derned uncomfortable for the wagons; for they could never tell just which way we were proposing to steer—& neither could we._ 

Inspired by his failed attempts, Clemens penned the story “Taming the Bicycle.”  

### TOGGLE —Baseball

Baseball is considered the national sport of the United States. Fans cheer on their favorite teams with opening day marking the beginning of summer and the World Series championship concluding the season. The Baseball Hall of Fame says: “the first professional baseball games were played in the wake of” the American Civil War and by the 1840s “baseball mania” was in full swing. They go on to say that “from the Civil War to Civil Rights and all points in between and beyond, the game of baseball supports and reflects many aspects of American life, from culture to economics and technological advances. It inspires movements, instills pride and even heals cities.” 

On May 18, 1875, Clemens and his friend Rev. Joseph Twichell took in a baseball game in Hartford—The Hartford Dark Blues versus the Boston Red Stockings. Over the course of the game (which Boston won) Clemens’s brown umbrella went missing, prompting the following newspaper advertisement:   _TWO HUNDRED AND FIVE DOLLARS REWARD – At the great baseball match on Tuesday, while I was engaged in hurrahing, a small boy walked off with an English-made brown silk UMBRELLA belonging to me, and forgot to bring it back. I will pay $5 for the return of that umbrella in good condition to my house on Farmington Avenue. I do not want the boy (in an active state) but will pay two hundred dollars for his remains. SAMUEL L. CLEMENS_ 

Several years later, during a summer stay in Elmira, New York, Clemens went from spectator to participant. He agreed to serve as umpire for the local baseball game as long as he was provided with a chair, fan, umbrella, and a pitcher of ice water. He was to be joined in his duties by friend and fellow umpire, Thomas Beecher, reverend of the Park Church. But Clemens changed his mind, a newspaper reported, saying “he could not make a martyr of himself, notwithstanding the fact that he would be glad to perish in a good cause.” He “used a big fan in a vigorous manner and said that he would encourage the players with his presence, but he must refuse to go out in the sun.” 

Despite his lack of cooperation in that game Clemens vigorously exclaimed, “Baseball...is the very symbol, the outward and visible expression of the drive, and push, and rush and struggle of the raging, tearing, booming nineteenth century!”  Clemens’s appreciation of the sport continued throughout the years, even attending games during his visit to Bermuda in 1908, a couple of years before his death. 

GRID–  Social Clubs
-------------------

we still need to write some thing for this introduction 🙂

### TOGGLE - Dec. Arts Society

When Candace Wheeler founded the New York Society of Decorative Arts in 1877, she implored women in cities across the country to create their own ancillary societies. Hartford was one of the first cities to respond. Wheeler was part of the design firm Associated Artists, along with Louis Comfort Tiffany, that was hired to decorate the interior of the Clemens family’s home in 1880. Hartford’s leading ladies joined together to help cultivate the new organization and counted Elizabeth Colt (who became president of the society), Harriet Beecher Stowe, Olivia Clemens, and Susan Warner among its eager participants. The newly formed Hartford Decorative Arts Society decided that what their city needed the most was an art school. They arranged studio and art classes, lectures on related topics like “chemistry of artists’ colors,” and put together exhibitions of the art, which would be sold to help “their philanthropic efforts for the benefit of poor women.” The school took in both male and female students and extended their services to those who could not afford it by establishing a scholarship fund that assisted twenty-four students over a five-year period. They soon outgrew the rented space they used and asked if the trustees of the Wadsworth Atheneum could help with this issue, which they did. In 1886 the group changed the name to the Art Society of Hartford, and it was officially incorporated on March 31st that year. The Society relied heavily on tuition, membership fees, and fundraising. Mark Twain, Charles Dudley Warner, and Candace Wheeler herself, donated their time and talents to help raise money. The Art Society of Hartford struggled throughout the years to make ends meet until 1956 when they joined with the Hartt College of Music and Hillyer College to create the University of Hartford.  

### TOGGLE - Saturday Morning Club

In October 1876 Samuel and Olivia helped form and organize a Hartford discussion group for 20 to 25 girls in their late teens. They would meet every Saturday morning to read and discuss topical essays and debate the content. Samuel put together the rules of the group and would participate himself by leading discussions and occasionally reading his own works aloud to them; he was the only male. Special guests were a common occurrence and included local college professors as well as authors such as William Dean Howells, Bret Harte, and Charles Dudley Warner. A few years after the club was formed Clemens ordered pins from Tiffany & Co. to give as a gift to the members (link to pin). After the Clemens family had to move out of their beloved Hartford home due to poor finances in 1891, the group continued to meet. In 1878, Olivia wrote a letter to its members before departing on a long overseas trip begging them that, “…you will keep the Club compact & strong, & neither suffer it to languish nor die – for it is worthy to outlive us all…” In fact, the Saturday Morning Club is still active to this day and gather together on appointed dates to read their work and discuss it with one another.  (link to more info on this?) 

### TOGGLE - Monday Evening Club

The Monday Evening Club was formed in 1869 and meant to be a discussion group for local distinguished Hartford men with a cap of twenty members. Its membership included such names as Dr. Horace Bushnell, Calvin Stowe, J.H. Trumbull, Rev. Joseph Twichell, Charles Dudley Warner, and others. The members of the group rotated hosting duties where they discussed papers read by their fellow participants.  Clemens was voted into the group in 1873 and presented his first paper titled, “License of the Press” shortly thereafter. He remained an active part of the group until 1890, a year before the family had to leave Hartford due to financial difficulties. Some of his presented papers included, “Universal Suffrage,” The Facts Concerning the Recent Carnival of Crime in Connecticut,” and “On the Decay of the Art of Lying.” (link to one or more of these). Clemens once wrote to William Dean Howells noting, “We always have a rattling good time at the Club.” 

GRID– Education
---------------

Susy, Clara, and Jean Clemens girls had their first lessons at home in the schoolroom next door to the nursery on the second floor of their Hartford home. This room was originally their father’s study, but he soon found that he could not work listening to such giggly, tumultuous play next door. Clemens moved out, and the girls moved in with their mother, Olivia, as their first teacher. In 1880 the family hired [Lilly Gillette Foote](https://docs.google.com/document/d/10Gv_UfskgSstizZWpQMTSU8aHpRgkTqK/edit#heading=h.qkb3veinmp41) to be their governess for the next eleven years. Ms. Foote and other tutors taught reading, writing, history, arithmetic, literature and science. Clemens wanted them to read German books before English books – his reason being that they would learn English no matter what, and it would be easier for them to learn other languages while they were young. Olivia employed a German nurse named [Rosa](https://docs.google.com/document/d/10Gv_UfskgSstizZWpQMTSU8aHpRgkTqK/edit#heading=h.uurk6igmk864) who always conversed with the children in German so they could practice their skills. The girls also studied piano, singing and social dancing. All these skills were expected of young upper middle-class women.

The two oldest daughters, Susy and Clara went on to attend Hartford Public High School. After preparing to attend Smith College in Northampton, Massachusetts, Susy Clemens entered Bryn Mawr College in Pennsylvania in the fall of 1890. The following year Olivia wrote to a friend that Susy was having a difficult time and believed it would be better if she left. A couple of months later Susy returned home and never went back. Clara went in an entirely different direction and spent the last years of the 1890s in Vienna to study singing and consequently started a professional career in Europe and the United States. Like her older sisters, Jean was educated at home during her childhood, however in 1896, she suffered a severe epileptic seizure while attending school in Elmira, New York. Her condition continued to worsen and interrupted her ability to continue her education in a traditional sense. Jean went on to teach herself to type in order to help her father with his manuscripts. She also became a talented wood carver, selling her pieces in order to have some spending money of her own.

#### _Toggle - Hartford High School_

The Hartford Public High School traces its history to the Latin School, organized in 1638 by Connecticut’s founder Rev. Thomas Hooker. When Connecticut governor Edward Hopkins died in 1657, he provided funds for a free school in the city. In 1839 there was a proposal to form a high school and in 1847 Hartford Public High School was dedicated. It moved in 1869 to a brick and brownstone school on Asylum Hill and was expanded due to enrollment demands in 1877. Sadly, just a few years later the school was destroyed in a fire and architect George Keller (link) designed a new structure which was enlarged again in 1897. Although the Clemens daughters received an education at home for their formative years from their mother, Olivia, or their governess Lilly Gillette Foote (link). Susy and Clara each spent their freshman year at Hartford Public High School, Susy during 1887-1888 and Clara during 1888-1889. They studied math, science, Latin, and history. Susy also studied a little Greek, while Clara dabbled in Modern Languages. The girls did have problems with their behavior. Susy often had unexcused absences and received 11 demerits over the school year. Clara received 13 demerits in one month. (You could receive a demerit for talking back, laughing out loud, or being caught in the hallway during class.) Over the following years the school boasted an observatory with telescopes, state of the art laboratories, and an impressive collection of dinosaur tracks and fossils. It remained intact until the 1960s when it was demolished and replaced with interstate 84. The present-day high school is located on Forest St. very close by where the Mark Twain House & Museum stands, and is the second oldest public secondary school in the country. 

#### _Toggle -The American Asylum for the Deaf and Dumb_

The origins of the American School for the Deaf (as it was ultimately renamed) are a much-loved story in the city. In 1814 the Rev. Thomas Gallaudet moved next door to the Cogswell family in Hartford. He noticed the difficulties their nine-year-old daughter, Alice Cogswell, had interacting with other children. He started by teaching her rudimentary ways to communicate through pictures and writing letters in the dirt. A group of neighbors took Alice on as a project, and Gallaudet was chosen to travel to France to study methods of teaching deaf students.  and brought back a talented deaf teacher, Laurent Clerc, to help him found the first permanent school for the deaf in the United States. The two pioneered the use of sign language as a way for the hearing-impaired to communicate.

 By the time the Clemenses moved to Hartford the “Asylum” was a major civic institution, having given its name to the former Lord’s Hill and to a major avenue leading west from the city. Many of its teachers and administrators were members of Asylum Hill Congregational Church nearby, and Samuel Clemens would occasionally speak there with sign language interpretation. The vast multi-porced building included a gymnasium and cabinet shop, as the school also trained students for work in industry. Clemens’s friend Rev. Joseph Twichell was deeply involved in the Asylum’s work, and traveled to Washington, D.C. in 1888 to speak at the college for the deaf there, now known as Gallaudet University.

#### _Toggle -The Chinese Educational Mission in Hartford, 1871-1881_

One evening in the 1870s Samuel Clemens sat down at the piano in the drawing room of his family’s Hartford house, tinkled the keys,  and with the help of Joseph Hawley, Civil War hero, former governor and future Senator, belted out African American spirituals for the benefit of honored guests. These were teachers from the Chinese Educational Mission, the first experiment in overseas education by the leaders of China’s Qing dynasty, which brought 120 boys to New England to study in local schools and ultimately, they hoped, U.S. colleges.

The project was the brainchild of Yung Wing, a businessman who had attended a private academy in Massachusetts before becoming the first Chinese graduate of Yale. “I was determined that the rising generation of China should enjoy the same educational advantages that I had; that through western education China might be regenerated, become enlightened and powerful,” he later wrote. The boys, aged 12 to 15, came to America in three contingents, their parents committing to their absence for 15 years. They were put up by families in homes extending from Massachusetts to New Haven. Their base was in Hartford, where the Chinese government built a large headquarters. Here the boys were to convene once a year to keep up with their language and with Confucianism.

Clemens’s friend Rev. Joseph Twichell was a leading booster of the effort, and Yung became a lifelong friend. Sadly, the effort foundered after a decade on the twin rocks of American racism and Chinese conservatism. Anti-Chinese riots on the West Coast led to the Chinese Exclusion Acts, which Clemens called “that infamous Chinese bill.” Meanwhile, conservatives in China became alarmed that the boys were becoming Americanized, some of them even converting to Christianity.

 Yung appealed to Twichell to ask ex-President Ulysses S. Grant  to use his influence with Chinese leaders to save the mission. Twichell got his friend Clemens, who knew Grant, to help, and the Mission was saved – but only for less than a year. The disappointed students returned. Many later  statesmen, naval officers, railway builders, interpreters and mining engineers. Some were able to return to the United States and finish their studies.

 A classmate at Hartford Public High School, William Lyon Phelps, recalled that at dances and receptions “the fairest and most sought-out belles invariably gave the swains of the Orient preference.” Elsie Yung, Yung Wing’s granddaughter, recalled how , when she was a girl in Shanghai, Mission veterans would tell her: “I used to dance with Mark Twain’s daughters.”

 Twichell, meanwhile, was prophetic in a speech he gave against anti-Chinese prejudice: “That rising power in the East, with a great future before it, has a memory, and we shall have to pay, in the event, for the liberties we have taken with it.”