---
title: The Grounds
layout: about
permalink: /digital-exhibition/clemens-family.html
# include CollectionBuilder info at bottom
credits: false
# Edit the markdown on in this file to describe your collection
# Look in _includes/feature for options to easily add features to the page
---

The family that settled in what is now known as the Mark Twain House had its origins in author Samuel Clemens’s dream newspaper assignment – to accompany a group of 73 fellow tourists on the nation’s first true ocean cruise on the steamship Quaker City for five months in 1867. 
The route was to take the ship from New York through the Mediterranean to what was then called the Holy Land, the area now encompassing Israel, Syria, Jordan and Lebanon, with side trips by rail. His dispatches home to the San Francisco newspaper Alta California were full of elegant descriptions of architecture and landscape – and hilarious swipes at European sophistication and American innocence.  The book that resulted, The Innocents Abroad, started Samuel’s literary career in earnest.  

One of his fellow travelers was a 18-year-old boy from Elmira, New York, named Charles Langdon whose parents had sent him on the trip to improve his education. One day, as the Quaker City was anchored in the Bay of Smyrna, Langdon showed Clemens a miniature portrait of his sister Olivia, and (so the story goes) the author fell in love with her on sight. 

He courted her in Elmira and New York City – their first date was to hear Charles Dickens read Steinway Hall in New York City, and her parents came along. Rebuffed at first, he finally convinced her to marry, and the knot was tied on February 2, 1870 in her parents home in Elmira. Their marriage was very much a partnership as well as a love affair. Clemens would leave pages for Olivia to read and review, valuing her suggestions and edits. He said of Olivia: “I take as much pride in her brains as I do in her beauty.”

Son Langdon was born in November, but this was before the days of vaccines, and the boy contracted diphtheria and died at 19 months. Daughter Susy had been born in 1872, and daughter Clara arrived in summer 1874, shortly before they moved into the Farmington Avenue house. Six years later daughter Jean was added to the family.

The 1890s and 1900s were difficult years for the family, with two daughters dying in their 20s – Susy in 1896 and Jean in 1909. Samuel lost his beloved Olivia in 1904, and he died in 1910, leaving daughter Clara as the sole survivor of the family and keeper of the author’s legacy.

## GRID– Samuel Clemens
### A Life Lived in a Rapidly Changing World: Samuel L. Clemens‚ 1835-1910


Samuel Clemens (1835-1910), creator of the persona of Mark Twain, lived through the rapid changes of full-scale 19th century American industrialization, nationalism (and Civil War), westward expansion and eminent domain over indigenous lands, imperialism, as well as the social and economic changes that accompanied these massive shifts during America’s Gilded Age. In all of this, Clemens was a sharp observer of the people and cultures around him, albeit through the lens of a white man who grew up during legalized slavery.  
 
However, Clemens’ understanding of the world changed over time as he moved from the South of his childhood, to the West and North, as well as Europe, and as he encountered different people, raised a family, and sought to make a living as a writer and performer. He started his career without the safety net of personal family wealth, and married into a wealthy family, allowing him some respite from precarity, but never enough. His life was a constant drive for economic stability; he built and lost several fortunes.  Over time, Clemens—and thus Twain--came to be a sharp critic of the American Dream, recognizing a false promise and the power of classism and racism in America. Over his life Clemens changed his opinions about slavery, racism, imperialism and more. He questioned gender norms and roles and recognized the performative nature of these cultural concepts. He also came to oppose America’s growing imperialism. At the same time his views of the indigenous people of America, remained deeply racist and problematic as were his views of Asian people.  

## The Early Years
Samuel Clemens was born on November 30, 1835 in Florida, Missouri, the sixth of seven children. At age 4, Samuel and his family moved to the small frontier town of Hannibal, Missouri, on the banks of the Mississippi River. Missouri at the time, was a fairly new state (it had gained statehood in 1821) on the country’s western border, with legalized slavery; Samuel’s father owned one enslaved person, and his uncle owned several. In fact, it was on his uncle’s farm that Samuel spent many boyhood summers playing in the enslaved people’s quarters, listening to tall tales and the spirituals that he would enjoy throughout his life.

In 1847, when Samuel was 11, his father died. Shortly thereafter he left school to work as a printer’s apprentice for a local newspaper. His job was to arrange the type for each of the newspaper’s stories, allowing Samuel to read the news of the world while completing his work.

## Twain’s Young Adult Life
At 18, Samuel headed east to New York City and Philadelphia, where he worked on several different newspapers and found some success at writing articles. By 1857‚ he had returned home to embark on a new career as a riverboat pilot on the Mississippi River. With the outbreak of the Civil War in 1861, however, all traffic along the river came to a halt, as did Samuel’s pilot career. Inspired by the times, Samuel joined up with a volunteer [Confederate unit called the Marion Rangers](https://marktwainstudies.com/mark-twain-forum-book-reviews-mark-twains-civil-war-edited-by-benjamin-griffin/), but he quit after just two weeks.

In search of a new career, Samuel headed west in July 1861, at the invitation of his brother, Orion, who had just been appointed secretary of the Nevada Territory. Lured by the infectious hope of striking it rich in Nevada’s silver rush, Samuel traveled across the open frontier from Missouri to Nevada by stagecoach. Along the journey Samuel encountered Indigenous peoples for the first time, along with a variety of unique characters, mishaps, and disappointments. These events would find a way into his short stories and books‚ particularly [Roughing It](https://marktwainhouse.org/about/mark-twain/major-works/).

After failing as a silver prospector‚ Samuel began writing for the Territorial Enterprise‚ a Virginia City‚ Nevada newspaper where he used‚ for the first time‚ his pen name‚ Mark Twain. Seeking change yet again, by 1864 Samuel headed for San Francisco where he continued to write for local papers.

In 1865 Samuel’s first “big break” came with the publication of his short story “Jim Smiley and His Jumping Frog ” in papers across the country. A year later Samuel was hired by the Sacramento *Union* to visit and report on the Sandwich Islands (now Hawaii). His writings were so popular that upon his return, he embarked upon his first lecture tour, which established him as a successful stage performer.

Hired by the Alta California to continue his travel writing from the east‚ Samuel arrived in New York City in 1867. He quickly signed up for a steamship tour of Europe and the “Holy Land.” His travel letters‚ full of vivid descriptions and tongue-in-cheek observations‚ met with such audience approval that they were later reworked into his first book‚ [*The Innocents Abroad*](https://marktwainhouse.org/about/mark-twain/major-works/), published in 1869. It was also on this trip that Clemens met his future brother-in-law, Charles Langdon. As the story goes, Langdon reportedly showed Samuel a picture of his sister‚ [Olivia](https://marktwainhouse.org/about/mark-twain/sam-clemens-family/olivia-livy-langdon-clemens/)‚ and Samuel fell in love at first sight.

## Twain Starts a Family and Moves to Hartford
After courting for two years, Samuel Clemens and Olivia (Livy) Langdon were married in 1870. They settled in a house gifted to them by Olivia’s father in Buffalo‚ New York and near her wealthy and connected family. Samuel become a partner‚ editor, and writer for the daily newspaper the *Buffalo Express*. While they were living in Buffalo, their first child, Langdon Clemens, was born.

n 1871 Samuel moved his family to Hartford, Connecticut, a city he had come to love while visiting his publisher there and where he had made friends. Olivia also had family connections to the city. For the first few years the Clemenses rented a house in the heart of Nook Farm, a residential area that was home to numerous writers, publishers, and other prominent figures. In 1872 Samuel’s recollections and tall tales from his frontier adventures were published in his book [*Roughing It*](https://marktwainhouse.org/about/mark-twain/major-works/). That same year the Clemenses’ first daughter Susy was born, but their son, Langdon, died at age two from diphtheria.

In 1873 Samuel’s focus turned toward social criticism. He and Hartford Courant publisher Charles Dudley Warner co-wrote [*The Gilded Age*](https://marktwainhouse.org/about/mark-twain/major-works/)‚ a novel that attacked political corruption‚ big business, and the American obsession with getting rich that seemed to dominate the era. Ironically, a year after its publication, Clemenses’ elaborate 25-room house on Farmington Avenue, which had cost the then-huge sum of $40‚000-$45‚000‚ was completed.

## Twain Writes his Most Famous Books While Living in Hartford
For the next 17 years (1874-1891), Samuel‚ Olivia, and their three daughters (Clara followed first daughter Susy in 1874 and Jean in 1880) lived in the Hartford home. During those years Samuel completed some of his most famous books, often finding a summer refuge for uninterrupted work at his sister-in-law’s farm in Elmira, New York. Novels such as [*The Adventures of Tom Sawyer*](https://marktwainhouse.org/about/mark-twain/major-works/) (1876) and [*Life on the Mississippi*](https://marktwainhouse.org/about/mark-twain/major-works/) (1883) captured both his Missouri memories and depictions of the American scene. Yet his social commentary continued. [*The Prince and the Pauper*](https://marktwainhouse.org/about/mark-twain/major-works/) (1881) explored class relations, as does [*A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur’s Court*](https://marktwainhouse.org/about/mark-twain/major-works/) (1889), which‚ going a step further‚ criticized oppression in general while examining the period’s explosion of new technologies. And‚ in perhaps his most famous work‚ [*Adventures of Huckleberry Finn*](https://marktwainhouse.org/about/mark-twain/major-works/) (1884)‚ Clemens‚ by the way he attacked the institution of slavery‚ railed against the failures of Reconstruction and the continued poor treatment of African Americans in his own time.

[*Huckleberry Finn*](https://marktwainhouse.org/about/mark-twain/major-works/) was also the first book published by Samuel’s own publishing company‚ The Charles L. Webster Company. In an attempt to gain control over publication as well as to make substantial profits, Samuel created the company in 1884. A year later he contracted with Ulysses S. Grant to publish Grant’s memoirs; the two-volume set provided large royalties for Grant’s widow and was a financial success for the publisher as well.

## Twain’s Financial Ruin and Subsequent Travels
Although Samuel enjoyed financial success during his Hartford years, he continually made bad investments in new inventions, which eventually brought him to bankruptcy. In an effort to economize and pay back his debts, Samuel and Olivia moved their family to Europe in 1891. When his publishing company failed in 1894, Samuel was forced to set out on a worldwide lecture tour to earn money. 

In 1896 tragedy struck when Susy Clemens, at age 24, died from meningitis while on a visit to the Hartford home. Unable to bear being in the place of her death, the Clemenses never returned to Hartford to live.

From 1891 until 1900‚ Samuel and his family traveled throughout the world. During those years Samuel witnessed the increasing exploitation of weaker governments by European powers‚ which he described in his book [*Following the Equator*](https://marktwainhouse.org/about/mark-twain/major-works/) (1897). The Boer War in South Africa and the Boxer Rebellion in China fueled his growing anger toward imperialistic countries and their actions. With the Spanish-American and Philippine wars in 1898‚ Samuel’s wrath was redirected toward the American government. When he returned to the United States in 1900, his finances restored, Samuel readily declared himself an anti-imperialist and, from 1901 until his death, served as the vice president of the Anti-Imperialist League.

## Twain’s Darkest Times and Late Life
In these later years, Samuel's writings turned dark. His works began to focus on human greed and cruelty and questioned the humanity of the human race. His public speeches followed suit and included a harshly sarcastic public introduction of Winston Churchill in 1900. Even though Samuel’s lecture tour had managed to get him out of debt, his anti-government writings and speeches threatened his livelihood once again. As Samuel was labeled by some as a traitor, several of his works were never published during his lifetime, either because magazines would not accept them or because of his own personal fear that his marketable reputation would be ruined.

In 1903, after living in New York City for three years, Olivia became ill, and Samuel and his wife returned to Italy, where she died a year later. After her death, Samuel lived in New York until 1908, when he moved into his last house, “Stormfield,” in Redding, Connecticut. In 1909 his middle daughter Clara was married. In the same year Jean, the youngest daughter, died from an epileptic seizure. Four months later, on April 21, 1910, Samuel Clemens died at age 74.

Like any good journalist, Samuel Clemens, better known as Mark Twain, spent his life observing and reporting on his surroundings. In his writings he provided images of the romantic, the real, the strengths and weaknesses of a rapidly changing world. By examining his life and his works, we can read into the past – piecing together various events of the era and the responses to them. We can delve into the American mindset of the late nineteenth century and make our own observations of history, discover new connections, create new inferences and gain better insights into the time period and the people who lived in it. As Samuel once wrote, “Supposing is good, but finding out is better.”

## GRID– Olivia Louise Langdon Clemens
Olivia Langdon Clemens was born Olivia Louise Langdon on Nov. 27, 1845, in Elmira, N.Y., the daughter of Jervis and Olivia Langdon. She had a younger brother, Charles, and an adopted older sister, Susan. Olivia was called “Livy” by her friends and family, and by her husband, Samuel L. Clemens, whom she married on Feb. 2, 1870. She was educated at home with private tutors and by taking classes at Elmira Female College ( Elmira College today). 

### Looking for a water cure
Olivia struggled with her health throughout her life. For much of her teenage years, Olivia was an invalid. Today scholars believe she may have contracted Pott’s disease. Throughout her life, Olivia would seek rest and cures for her ailments. At age 14, Olivia roomed at Gleason’s Water Cure in Elmira along with her friend Alice Hooker, daughter of women’s suffrage activist Isabella Beecher Hooker of Hartford. The facility was run by Drs. Silas and Rachel Gleason and was located just downhill from Quarry Farm. The “water cure” was based on hydropathy, the Victorian idea that water had curative powers.Treatments through ingestion, immersion, and mists or sprays included steam saunas and cold-water therapy. Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony took the cure, as did other upper-class women who could afford the $7- to $10-per-week charge for live-in treatments, and could spend weeks or months away from home. The Gleasons held the belief that women could treat other women more effectively than men could, and that women tended to recuperate better when surrounded and supported by other women. Rachel Gleason, the fourth woman in United States history known to practice medicine with a degree, is recognized not only for her work at the Water Cure and as an advocate for women’s health, but also with a role in the beginnings of modern gynecology. She wrote a book on home treatments called Talks to my Patient; Hints on Getting Well and Keeping Well and lectured widely. She delivered all four of the Clemens children, and Samuel Clemens called her “the almost divine Mrs. Gleason.” 

## The Langdons: A Progressive Family
Elmira’s location near the intersection of the Chemung and Erie canals and later a major railroad depot made it a center of commerce, industry and culture in which Jervis Langdon was very successful. His business was timber and coal, and the Langdons were one of the leading families of the community, both financially and in terms of their idealism. Olivia’s intellectual and progressive upbringing would be a major influence on Samuel Clemens and his writing. Olivia was raised in Elmira’s hotbed of reform. Her father participated in the Underground Railroad; they socialized with leading doctors, theologians and suffragists of the time.

There is evidence to support the idea that Olivia’s parents often worked as equals in a time when women were rarely accepted in the public sphere. Olivia’s mother was able to be socially active through charities and women’s social organizations. She was an active supporter of abolition and temperance. Olivia’s aunt was a pioneering itinerant teacher at a time when women were just beginning to be allowed to graduate with college degrees considered to be equal to those of men.

## Samuel Clemens and Olivia Langdon: A Love Story
Samuel Clemens entered Olivia’s life in the time not long after her health began to improve. Olivia’s younger brother, Charles, was a fellow passenger with Clemens on the Quaker City in 1867. According to legend, Charles showed Clemens a miniature painting of his older sister on ivory, and Clemens fell in love with her on the spot. After they returned from the tour, Charles invited Clemens to dine with the Langdon family in New York City. Little is known of that first meeting. A few days later, New Year’s Day, Clemens called on Olivia at the house where she was staying. Rather than stay the socially acceptable 15 minutes, he stayed for 12 hours. During the summer of 1868 the Langdons invited Clemens to visit their home in Elmira, during which time Clemens’ feelings for Olivia deepened. Although it took some time, eventually Olivia reciprocated Samuel’s devotions. Their courtship, marriage and love for one another are much documented in the correspondence they exchanged throughout their marriage.

Like the relationship between her own parents, Olivia’s and Samuel’s marriage was very much one of equals. Deeds to their house and land in Hartford were in Olivia’s name. For a time Mark Twain’s copyrights were transferred to her to preserve the family income from creditors. Olivia was also an active participant in her husband’s writing. He left pages of manuscript by her bedside for her to read and review. He often, though not always, accepted her suggestions. Visitors in the Mark Twain House today hear the story of how the children would sit by Mama as she read Papa’s writing, and how she would turn down the pages when she saw something that needed more work. Susy and Clara would cry out because Mama wanted to cut out some of the parts the girls thought were most “delectable.” Clemens remembered in his autobiography how he liked to insert phrases and incidents which he knew Olivia would not approve – just to see her reaction.

## The Clemenses' Family Life
Since Samuel did not enjoy the details of domestic life, he was more than happy to have Olivia take a leading role in the workings of the household. Though she suffered numerous bouts of illness she remained the emotional center and strength of the family. It was Olivia who worked on details of managing the house; it was Olivia who was the primary caregiver (along with the servants) of the couple’s three daughters; and she was indisputably held in high esteem by everyone she met. Both Clemens and the children described her as being the firm, yet gentle, moral center of the household. That being said, spanking was not unheard of in the Clemens household. It was a means of discipline both Samuel and Olivia used as a last resort.

After Susy’s death in 1896 it was Olivia who refused to live in the Hartford home where they had raised their children. The family’s grief was intensified by Jean’s struggle with epilepsy. In her 1931 memoir My Father: Mark Twain, Clara reminisced that no one in the family smiled for a long time. In the years after Susy’s death, the family lived a somewhat nomadic existence mostly in Europe. The perpetual travel and Jean’s need for ongoing care took its toll on Olivia’s health. Clemens described it as “five years of constant anxiety and periodical shocks and frights.” In August 1902, Olivia suffered what was probably a heart attack. She had chest pain and difficulty breathing. Her health continued to deteriorate.

## Olivia's Deteriorating Health and Death
Late in 1903 the family decided to travel to Florence, Italy, where they thought the pleasant climate would improve Olivia’s health. Samuel was kept separate from her for much of her last months: She was supposed to be kept quiet and unexcited, so he would send little love notes to her twice a day. He would break the rules and make brief visits to sit with her and give her kisses. Clara and their longtime maid, Katy Leary, spent the most time with Olivia. Clara would make sure that no news of Jean’s illness was shared with their mother, to keep her from worrying. Jean, in turn, was not allowed to hear about her mother’s failing health. Clara suffered terribly as this intermediary.

Olivia died on June 5, 1904. Her death would leave a hole in the family that neither of his daughters or friends could fill. In their memoirs and letters, Clara, Katy – and particularly the stricken Samuel Clemens himself – comment on their inability to take part in everyday life, travel, and writing after Olivia’s death.

### GRID– Langdon Clemens  
When in November 1870 Samuel and Olivia Clemens celebrated the birth of their first child, he was given Olivia’s family name, Langdon. The new father took the opportunity to write to Olivia’s grandmother in the baby’s voice:

> I tell you, I am tired being bundled up head & ears nine-tenths of my time. And I don’t like this thing of being stripped naked & washed. I like to be stripped & warmed at the stove—that is real bully—but I do despise this washing business. I believe it to be a gratuitous & unnecessary piece of meanness. I never see them wash the cat.

It was a premature birth, however, and Olivia had a long convalescence, with many worries about the baby’s health, and then a new pregnancy. During Langdon’s eighteen months of life the family moved from Buffalo, New York, to Hartford, Connecticut, and in 1871 traveled to Olivia’s sister Susan Crane’s farm in Elmira. There Susy Clemens was born in March, and after her baptism in late May the family returned to Hartford. By now the heavy cough that the “cubbie,” as his father called him, was suffering from started to alarm the family. On June 2 Langdon succumbed to diphtheria, as noted in the city’s vital records: “NAME: Clemens, Langdon. PLACE OF DEATH: Forest Street. TIME OF DEATH: June 2. AGE: one year, six months.” The attending physician was Cincinnatus Taft, a family friend. 
In an autobiographical dictation to a secretary in 1906, Samuel Clemens burst out with the statement “I was the cause of the child’s illness.” He had taken the child out for a carriage drive on a cold, raw morning in Elmira, and, lost in thought, let the furs fall from the baby’s legs. But in 1911 Susan Crane corrected the record in a letter to Clemens’s biographer: 

> *Yes, the drive was in Elmira, but we never thought of attributing Langdon’s death to that drive, as I remember. It is true he took cold, but was so much better that the physician said he was perfectly able to take that journey. After he arrived in Hartford diphtheria developed—Mr Clemens was often inclined to blame himself unjustly.*

### GRID– Olivia Susan Clemens
Olivia Susan Clemens, called “Susy” by her family, was the second child and the oldest of three daughters. Born March 19, 1872, Susy was a baby when Langdon died, and after his death both parents doted on Susy. Their close attachment to her remained significant throughout her youth and young adulthood. She was a precocious child, and Clemens wrote that even as a small child she had big thoughts. Clemens and Olivia kept a record of many of the startling and humorous comments made by Susy and her younger sister‚ Clara in a document called “The Children’s’ Record: A Record of the Small foolishnesses of Susie and ‘Bay’ Clemens August 1876 – 1885”. Samuel records Susy’s comments about prayer, and about good and bad behavior. Susy grew to love writing, theater and music.

As a teenager Susy was prone to bouts of depression and other illness, which limited some of her activities. When she was 13, Susy began writing a biography of her father, incorporating family stories, letters he had written, articles about him and her own thoughts about her father. Much of Susy’s writing is included in Mark Twain’s autobiographical writings, where he preserves her grammar and spelling and reflects on her version of events. (Today Susy’s words can be read in a stunning children’s version of her book called The Extraordinary Mark Twain (According to Susy) by Barbara Kerley.) The children entertained themselves and family friends with games of charades and acted out their favorite stories. They turned their father’s book *The Prince and the Pauper* into a stage play in which Susy played a starring role. Susy herself wrote a play called *The Love-Chase* that she and her sisters and friends performed in the drawing room of the house.

Susy Clemens entered Bryn Mawr College outside of Philadelphia in the fall of 1890 and remained for one semester. During that time Susy was living apart from her parents and struggling with her own sense of self. She met and began a romantic relationship with a woman named Louise Brownell. Historians have speculated on the reasons for her departure from Bryn Mawr, but the strongest is probably that of being separated from her family during trying times. Both her grandmothers died that fall, and the girls were particularly close to Olivia’s mother. That emotional loss, and the family’s worsening financial status, are thought to be the main reasons Susy returned home. The separation from Louise was difficult for Susy; she wrote Louise from Switzerland in October 1891 saying :My darling I do love you so and I feel so separated from you. If you were here I would kiss you hard on that little place that tastes so good just on the right-hand side of your nose.” Louise kept all of Susy’s letters, which today are held at [Hamilton College Library](https://litsdigital.hamilton.edu/collections/susy-clemens) and scholar Linda Morris presented her research into Susy’s final years as one of the Mark Twain House & Museum’s [*Trouble Begins*](https://youtu.be/AofyesfvQ2Q) lectures.

Susy wrote from Switzerland as due to her fathers financial struggles the family spent the better part of 1891 to 1895 in Europe. During this time, Susy concentrated her efforts on becoming an opera singer, but that too was unsuccessful. When Clemens was forced to go on a round-the-world lecture tour in order to raise money and pay off his debts in the summer of 1895 Susy did not go. She remained in Elmira, N.Y. with her mothers’ family and her youngest sister, Jean.

Before the family was reunited a year later, Susy fell ill with spinal meningitis and died at their Hartford home. Her mother and sister Clara were on-route to Hartford when Susy died Aug. 18, 1896, at the age of 24. Her family never returned to the Hartford home to live, and it was sold in 1903. 

### GRID– Clara Langdon Clemens 
Clara Langdon Clemens was two years younger than her older sister Susy: She was born June 8, 1874. Because they were so close in age, much of Clara’s early years are similar to Susy’s: full of social life, homeschooling in language and music, and foreign travel. Clara’s childhood nickname was “Bay” which evolved from toddler Susy’s pronunciation of “baby” and stuck.

Clara was more adventurous than her older sister and more prone to mishaps, breaking her ankle while sledding on the steep slope where the Hartford house sits. As a young woman, she accompanied her parents on their round-the-world trip in 1895-96. Clara’s *My Father: Mark Twain* is largely concerned with describing their travels on that lecture tour. Clara was a fine pianist and also performed as a singer. Her hopes of becoming an opera star were never fulfilled, but she had a somewhat successful career as a recital soloist.

Clara was the daughter who found it easiest to function independently of her family, and longed to break away and start her own life. After Susy’s death, Clara found herself in the emotionally draining position of keeping the family together. Her mother’s health was declining and her younger sister‚ Jean‚ suffered from epilepsy. Both were under doctor’s orders to avoid stress or excitement. Clara helped nurse them both, but was not allowed to tell either of the other’s status.

Samuel, who was not permitted to spend much time with his wife during her illness, was unequipped to care for Jean’s needs, and virtually no help to Clara at all. After her mother’s death, Clara suffered an emotional collapse and spent twelve months away from her family, with a physician in attendance in a cottage in rural Norfolk, Connecticut, with visitors restricted. She longed to start a career for herself that did not depend on her fathers’ name for success. She spent her time between traveling for performances and at home with her father managing household affairs.

Clara was the only Clemens child to survive their father. In 1909, she married Russian pianist, composer, and conductor Ossip Gabrilowitsch. Together they had one daughter, Nina. Later in life, she occasionally sang on her husband’s concert tours and for fundraising concerts to raise money for Mark Twain historical sites.Among these was the Mark Twain Memorial, the predecessor organization to The  Mark Twain House & Museum. Clara also shared family furnishings and her memories of growing up in the home with the early stewards of the house.

After her husband’s death in 1936 Clara married another Russian musician, Jacques Samoussoud, and spent her last years living in southern California. She died Nov. 19, 1962, at the age of 88.

GRID– Jane Lampton Clemens
Jane Lampton Clemens, born July 26, 1880, was named after her paternal grandmother and always called “Jean” by her family and friends. She was the youngest child of Samuel and Olivia Clemens. Later in 1880, Clemens wrote to his sister: “Jean is as fat as a watermelon, & just as sweet, & good, & often just as wet.” Her parents did not record as many details of her early years as they did when writing of the older children.
Jean loved wildlife and being outdoors. As a teenager and young adult she was what today would be called an animal rights activist. She joined the Humane Society and made donations to similar organizations during the family’s many travels. She loved horseback riding, and as an adult longed for a vocation and source of income of her own to make her more independent.
In 1891, when the family packed up for Europe, Clara and Susy were practically adults‚ with careers in mind. At that point Jean was only 11, and still had much of her childhood left.Most Mark Twain scholars mark Susy’s death in August 1896 as the point at which the lives of the families changed, but Jean was diagnosed with epilepsy five months before Susy’s death, and in the years before this displayed behavior in the household that was somewhat disruptive. Jean’s illness was also a huge blow. Jean was 15, and she was not able to experience the idyllic teenage years her sisters had enjoyed. While in Europe the family sought out doctors to treat Jean in England, Sweden, Germany‚ and Switzerland, but constant travel also took its toll.
Jean’s illness had periods of remission and periods when she would have frequent grand mal seizures. She was supposed to be kept calm: The conventional medical wisdom of the day dictated that excitement and worry made the seizures more frequent. She was kept under constant supervision by her parents; Olivia stayed with Jean night and day when she was having her “spells.”

Few scholars mention the effect this constant stress in caring for Jean put on her mother’s own declining health. There was social stigma surrounding epilepsy, and sufferers were often ostracized. It was Olivia who insisted that Jean be included in as many family and social activities as her health would allow. Her mother and father both thought that by being vigilant they could hold off the seizures.

Jean was prescribed fresh air and exercise, such as horseback riding, which she loved. She carved elegant glove boxes and chests after studying the craft as part of her treatment, and always hoped that if she could get healthy enough she could make a modest income from her art.

She was kept on a sedative and a strict diet that limited meat and sweets. When her mother died and Clara suffered her own emotional breakdown, Jean's care was left to her father and his staff. He was unable to maintain the level of care she had received from her mother, and Jean spent most of her last years separated from her father, living in sanitariums and treatment centers believed to be the best choice for her health. 

In 1906, Jean was admitted to a new sanitarium, the Hillbourne Club in Katonah, New York. She stayed in one of the several bungalows under the care and supervision of doctors. Here, her diet became stricter and her activities more regulated. Jean wrote in her diary on Saturday, November 3,1906: *This week [Dr. Hunt] has given me three pretty strict commands; 1- not to eat salt! And I have always been in the habit of putting iron everybit of food I taste that wasn’t actually sweet or liquid; 2 - not write many letters, as a rule nor more than one daily; 3 - stay out of doors four or five hours a day. And also said he would like me to carve two hours. How I am to get it all in remains to be seen.* Jean made friends during her time at the Hillbourne Club. Residents enjoyed dancing, skiing, skating, bowling, and playing squash and other games like chess, poker, and Up Jenkins.

In the fall of 1909 Clemens realized he and Clara needed to take full responsibility for Jean’s care, and she returned to live with her father on his property in Redding, Conn. In the last few months of her life Jean reconciled with her father and worked as his personal secretary. She died of an apparent heart attack, the result of a seizure, on Christmas Eve, 1909. She was 29.

## You also marry their family...

### GRID– Jane Lampton Clemens (1803-1890)
Samuel’s mother was born in Adair County, Kentucky. In 1823 she married John Marshall Clemens, in part to spite a former suitor. The couple had seven children, of whom only four (Orion, Pamela, Samuel, and Henry) survived at the time of John Marshall Clemens’s death in 1847. The widowed Jane left Hannibal, Missouri, and between 1853 and 1870 lived in Muscatine, and possibly Keokuk, Iowa, and in St. Louis, Missouri, initially as part of Orion Clemens’s household and then with her daughter Pamela Moffett. After Samuel married and settled in Buffalo, New York, in 1870, Jane set up house in nearby Fredonia, with the widowed Pamela. In 1882 she moved to Keokuk, Iowa, where she lived with Orion for the rest of her life. She was buried in Hannibal’s Mount Olivet Cemetery, alongside her husband and her son Henry. In an autobiographical sketch written in 1897 or 1898, Samuel commented that his mother had “come handy to me several times in my books, where she figures as Tom Sawyer’s ‘Aunt Polly.’” Her Hannibal pastor called her “a woman of the sunniest temperament, lively, affable, a general favorite.” Samuel wrote about her at length in “Jane Lampton Clemens” (1890).

### GRID– John Marshall Clemens (1798-1847)
Born in Virginia, John Marshall Clemens studied law and was licensed to practice in 1822. He married Jane Lampton of Kentucky in 1823. In 1827 the Clemenses relocated to Jamestown, Tennessee, where Clemens opened a store and eventually became a clerk of the county court. With an eye to the family’s future, he purchased about seventy-five thousand acres near Jamestown; the investment never yielded any return but frustration and bitterness to the next generation. In 1835 Clemens moved his family to Missouri, settling first in the village of Florida, where Samuel was born, then in 1839 moving to Hannibal, where Clemens kept a store on Main Street and was elected justice of the peace. He was regarded as one of the foremost citizens of the county, scrupulously honest, but within his family circle he was taciturn and irritable. His sudden death from pneumonia in 1847 left the family in genteel poverty. When his father died Samuel was only eleven; he later wrote that “my own knowledge of him amounted to little more than an introduction.”

### GRID– Jervis Langdon (1809-1870)
Jervis Langdon, a native of New York State, married Olivia Lewis in 1832, and the pair settled in Elmira, New York, in 1845. He became prosperous in the lumber business and then wealthy in the coal trade, which he entered in 1855. His extensive operations included mines in Pennsylvania and Nova Scotia, and a huge rail and shipping network supplying coal to western New York State, Chicago, and the Far West. An ardent abolitionist, Jervis Langdon served as a “conductor” on the Underground Railroad, and counted Frederick Douglass, whom he had helped to escape from slavery, among his friends. Jervis and Olivia Langdon had three children: Susan (who was adopted), Olivia (“Livy”), and Charles. Jervis approved Samuel’s marriage to Olivia despite his marked difference in social status. He lent Samuel one-half of the $25,000 needed to buy the Buffalo Express and gave the newlyweds a house in Buffalo. He died in 1870 of stomach cancer, leaving bequests totaling $1 million. Olivia’s inheritance was to remain central in the life of the Clemens family.

### GRID– Olivia Lewis Langdon (1810-1890)


Olivia Lewis Langdon, Olivia Clemens’s mother, was “a Victorian of the pleasantest type,” according to her granddaughter Ida Langdon – “she was intellectual and she was practical, she was socially inclined and socially gifted.” Like her husband Jervis, she was deeply committed to the abolitionist cause before the Civil War. 

She was a yearly visitor to the Hartford house, a room on the second floor being reserved for her (and for Samuel Clemens’s mother, Jane Lampton Clemens, a less frequent visitor). Anticipating a visit in 1886, Samuel Clemens wrote: “Now, mother dear, we shall be ready for you any day after this week, & the sooner the satisfactorier. Livy has got a new boiler in, & it’s a great geyser-of-Yellowstone for liberality in the way of hot water. You can have  hot water always, now, & all you want.”

She presided over an elegant mansard-roofed home in Elmira, New York, its grounds planted with native and exotic trees. Two greenhouses on the property – one for flowers, one for grape vines – included a massive night-blooming cereus, which produced its showy blooms in mid-summer twilight. “Hammocks and bird-cages, their occupants only mildly disturbed by an occasional passing horse-car, hung on the front porch,” Ida Langdon reports.

“My grandmother Langdon was a strong and lovable personality,” Clara Clemens wrote. “She ruled in the house, but she carried a scepter of love, which drew willing obedience from everyone.” Her birthday parties were  memorable to young Clara: “All the guests were presented with more gifts apiece than the birthday child received from all the others combined... We felt almost as if we had cheated someone, and that added to our pleasure.”

Olivia Sr.’s generosity also helped sustain the Clemens household, as shown  in the 16-month trip Samuel and Olivia took to Europe in 1878-79, when Olivia purchased nearly $5,000 worth of household furnishings – think $100,000 in today’s money – largely subsidized by her mother. 

### Susan Langdon Crane (1836-1924)
Born Susan Dean, she was orphaned at the age of four and adopted by the Langdon family. Though Susan was nearly ten years older than her foster-sister, Olivia Langdon Clemens, they remained close throughout their lives. In 1858 she married Theodore Crane, who would later become a partner in the Langdon family coal business. Susan Crane owned Quarry Farm, in Elmira, New York, where the Clemens family usually spent the summer, and where Samuel did much of his most famous writing in a small building specially made for him. Samuel also convinced her to be an investor in both the Paige typesetting machine and in his Charles L. Webster publishing company.

Theodore Crane, after marrying Susan, went into business with his father-in-law, Jervis Langdon. “Theodore Crane was competent in his line – that of head clerk and Superintendent of the subordinate clerks,” wrote Clemens. He described Crane’s absolute reliance on Susan Crane: “He will die if he has to go ten days without seeing Sue.”
 
“Aunt Sue was the one person I have ever seen who appeared to be continually above and beyond the hurts inflicted by human existence,” Clara Clemens wrote. “Father sometimes called her Saint Sue, and she returned the compliment by calling him Holy Samuel, though with a strong touch of humor in her tone of voice.” Samuel Clemens himself wrote in late life: “Her head is white now, but she is as pretty and winning and sweet as she was in those ancient times at her Quarry Farm, where she was an idol and the rest of us were her worshippers.”

### GRID– Ossip Gabrilowitsch (1878-1936)
Ossip Gabrilowitsch was born in St. Petersburg, Russia. A musical prodigy, he studied piano in Vienna under Theodor Leschetizky. In 1898, he met his teacher’s new pupil Clara Clemens, and a lengthy courtship ensued. In 1905 Gabrilowitsch moved to Berlin to study conducting with Arthur Nikisch. Gabrilowitsch and Clara were married at Samuel’s house Stormfield in 1909, and their only child Nina was born there in 1910. On the outbreak of World War One, the Germans arrested Gabrilowitsch as an enemy national, but friends procured his release. The Gabrilowitsches moved to the United States in 1914, where he gained fame both as pianist and conductor. He became music director of the Detroit Symphony Orchestra in 1918. Cancer of the stomach forced him into retirement in 1935 and he died the next year. Ossip is buried in Woodland Cemetery in Elmira, New York next to Clara and his daughter Nina. 

### GRID– Nina Gabrilowisch (1910-1966)
When Samuel Clemens died in April 1910 his daughter Clara, who had married the pianist and conductor Ossip Gabrilowitsch the previous fall, was five months pregnant – a fact she seems not to have relayed to her father in his final days. Nina Gabrilowitsch was born in August, and was raised in the busy environs of a significant musician’s career. The family moved to Munich, Germany, where Ossip conducted the Munich Philharmonic. When World War I broke out Ossip was interned as a Russian national. Clara worked hard to get him back to the United States, where he served for eighteen years as director of the Detroit Symphony Orchestra.

Nina traveled much in her youth and was taught by private tutors. Home movies show the family clowning around on the lawn of their large Detroit home, and Nina’s graduating from New York’s Barnard College. Her biographers attribute the influence of a male lover to her ultimate alcoholism. She began training as an actress, participating in summer stock productions, as shown in dozens of snapshots in the collection of The Mark Twain House & Museum.

Ossip died in 1936. In the 1940s Nina moved to California, where her mother had relocated. Clara by then had met and married her second husband, Jacques Samossoud. Samossoud, also a musician, composed music for films, and Nina hoped that this connection might help her career. Her mother helped her, paying for plastic surgery Nina felt she needed – a nose job – and for acting school. She gave Nina a house and an allowance from Samuel Clemens’s estate. But their relationship broke down as Nina became more addicted to alcohol and drugs. In 1958, she spent a year in detox at the California State Psychiatric Hospital.

When Clara died in 1962, she had cut Nina out of her will, which was contested by her daughter. Her lawyers reached a settlement with Samoussoud’s lawyers, In her last years Nina spent time in sanitariums and under the supervision of a psychiatrist. In January 1966, after telling a  bartender “When I die, I want artificial flowers, jitterbug music, and a bottle of vodka at my grave,” she went home – to a motel room – and overdosed on sleeping pills. Nina is buried in Woodland Cemetery in Elmira, New York near the rest of the Clemens and Langdon family members.

### GRID– Jacques Samossoud (1894-1966)
Clara Clemens married the pianist and orchestra conductor Ossip Gabrilowitsch in 1909, shortly before her father’s death. Gabrilowitsch, who led the Detroit Symphony for many years, died in 1936, and Clara relocated to Hollywood. There she met another Russian musician, Jacques Samossoud, and married him when she was 70 years old. She described the marriage as “positively miraculous in its multifarious strata of rainbowism.”

Sammosoud, who was 50, made wild claims about the major orchestras he had conducted and celebrities he was acquainted with, almost all of the claims untrue. He began borrowing heavily from the inheritance and royalties Clara had earned from her father’s and her first husband’s fame, spending the money on investment schemes, visits to Las Vegas, and racetrack betting. His debt was so large by 1951 that the couple held a massive auction not only of their Hollywood house but also Clara’s large collection of her father’s letters, manuscripts, books, and artifacts.

They relocated to San Diego, where their financial situation worsened. When she died in 1962 she left what was left of Samuel Clemens’s estate to Samossoud and a horse-racing friend of his, Dr. William Seiler.

Samossoud died in 1966 and is buried in an unmarked grave in Woodland Cemetery in Elmira, New York near the rest of the Clemens and Langdon family members. While his reputation as a kind of musical conman and gambler who wore down Clara’s inheritance persists, the actor Hal Holbrook, who was able to visit Clara and Jacques after one of his Mark Twain Tonight performances, described Jacques as a loving and attentive husband to Clara. 
