---
title: Enter Through The Back Door
layout: about
permalink: /digital-exhibition/enter-through-the-back-door.html
# include CollectionBuilder info at bottom
credits: false
# Edit the markdown on in this file to describe your collection
# Look in _includes/feature for options to easily add features to the page
---
Olivia grew up in a wealthy Elmira family and when she married Samuel, he was expected to meet the same social and economic levels to which she was accustomed.  When they moved to Hartford, the Clemenses joined the Nook Farm neighborhood which came with the social network expected of this upperly-mobile couple. One of the expectations of their upper-middle class lifestyle was to have paid staff to cook and clean, watch the children, and run the house. And with a 25-room house, three growing girls, and all the visitors coming to see “the famous Mark Twain”, they needed to hire a lot of people to keep things running. At any given moment, the family would have employed between 7 and 11 people at a time. Between 1874 and 1891, the house and carriage house were home, work, or both to more than 30 different people. We don’t know the names and stories for all of those thirty people as not all of them are recorded in documents such as letters or census records, but we do know a little bit about a few of them and are constantly attempting to discover more.

### GRID– George Griffin (c. 1850-1897)
Born enslaved, probably in Maryland, around 1850, George Griffin escaped to the Union Army during the Civil War and served as personal servant to a major general. As an adult he made his way to Hartford where he worked as a waiter at the Allyn House, the preeminent hotel of the era. In his essay “A Family Sketch,” Samuel Clemens recalls that Griffin came one day “to wash some windows and remained half a generation.” While Samuel’s story is funny and can be romanticized, the position of butler was not one that Griffin could have attained accidentally. It was a responsible, supervisory post, the head of the household staff (with the possible exception of the ladies’ maid and coachman). And in 1870s Hartford, supervising white servants was an unusual role for an African American. It is more likely that the two crossed paths in Hartford, possibly at the Allyn House, and Griffin was recommended for the position of butler in the Clemenses’ newly formed household. 

As butler, he was a close friend of the family, and a special favorite of the three Clemens daughters; a “deacon & autocrat” of Hartford’s A.M.E. Zion Church; a political force in the African-American community; and an inveterate and brilliant gambler. Clemens calls him “shrewd, wise, polite, always good-natured, cheerful to gaiety, honest, religious, a cautious truth-speaker.” 
In the household, Griffin preferred listening to speaking. At dinner, Clara Clemens reported, “he preferred listening to the conversation to passing them food. He explained that the intellectual inspiration he received in the dining-room saved him from the bad effects of life in the inferior atmosphere of the kitchen.” He also picked up political gossip, which helped him in his role as a leader of the African American community in Hartford but also gave him important advance information about elections, which Griffin shrewley used to advance his financial prospects through his side business as a local bookmaker. According to Clemens, five years after Griffin started working for the family, his check was good for $10,000.  And “his word was worth par,” Clemens wrote in a loving memoir, “when he was not protecting Mrs. Clemens or the family interests or furnishing information about a horse to a person he was purposing to get a bet out of.” 

When financial trouble caused the Clemenses to leave the house in 1891, Griffin secured a position as a waiter at the Union League Club in New York City. At the club, Griffin served “as banker for the other waiters, forty in number,” lending them money “at rather high interest, & as security he took their written orders on the cashier for their maturing wages.” He also lent money outside the club, accepting gold watches and diamonds as security, and “had about a hatful of these trifles in the club safe.” He died, aged about 47, after a full day of work at the club in May 1897.

Griffin was married twice, first to a woman named Rhoda with whom he had a daughter who died in infancy; and then to a woman named Mary with whom he had a son, Lucius, who unfortunately died as a teenager. Mary and Lucious are both buried in Old North Church on the north-side of Hartford. Griffin’s burial is believed to be unmarked in New York City. 

In 2024 the Twain scholar Kevin Mac Donnell of Austin, Texas, was able to locate the sole known photograph of Griffin, who until then was only known in Clemens’s and other members of the household’s written portraits. Mac Donnell also produced the first full-scale biography of Griffin, published in the Mark Twain Journal’s spring issue, which filled out many previously unknown elements of his career and family life. 

### GRID– Catherine “Katy” Leary (1856-1934)
When the family summered in Olivia Clemens’s hometown of Elmira, New York, in 1880, she hired a 24-year old Irish woman, Catherine Leary, as maid. Always known to the family as “Katy,” for thirty years she worked as their seamstress, nursemaid, nanny, and lady’s maid. 

“Katy was a potent influence, all over the premises,” Samuel Clemens wrote of her. “Fidelity, truthfulness, courage, magnanimity, personal dignity, a pole-star for steadiness—these were her equipment, along with a heart of Irish warmth, quick Irish wit, and a large good store of the veiled & shimmering & half surreptitious humor which is the best feature of the ‘American’ brand—or of any brand, for that matter.” 

In addition to brushing and styling Olivia Clemens’s hair, Leary cared for Samuel’s as well. He “had a horror of being baldheaded,” she recalled, and thought that a scalp massage would preserve his abundant mane of hair. Leary performed this task for him on a daily basis. In gratitude, the author presented Leary with a portrait of himself, inscribed “To Katy Leary from her friend Mark Twain.” The inscription, fittingly, is nestled in the author’s hair in the photograph.

Leary also provided important personal support for the family, being present at the deaths of daughter Susy in 1896, Olivia Clemens in 1904, daughter Jean in 1909, and finally Samuel Clemens himself in 1910. Her dictated 1925 memoir, A Lifetime with Mark Twain, displayed complete loyalty to the family: “I didn’t think of the money I was earning, and I never interfered in any way with them. I wouldn’t ever do it – they came first – And I did it because I loved them and they was so good to me – just like I was one of their own.”

After Samuel Clemens’s death she worked for the sole surviving Clemens family member, middle daughter Clara, for a short period. She then ran a boarding house in New York City while living on a $10,000 bequest from Clemens and a monthly pension from Clara. In 1922, Leary returned to Elmira and lived the remainder of her years in the home she inherited from her parents. Leary is buried in Elmira’s Saint Peter and Paul’s Catholic cemetery with her sister, across town from the Clemens and Langdon families. 

### GRID– Rosina “Rosa” Hay (c. 1850-1920)
Rosina Hay was hired by the Clemenses when they moved into their Hartford home in 1874 as a nursemaid for Susy, age 2, and Clara, born that year. German-born Rosina had been living with her brother, a barber in Hartford in 1874, but the Clemenses actually met her two years earlier when they were summering at Fenwick Hall on the Connecticut shore. Olivia wrote to her sister-in-law, Mollie Clemens, about Rosina: “I have found a little German maid who is entirely accustomed to children and comes highly recommended…She was taking care of children in Fenwick when we were there.” 

“Rosa,” as she was called, was held in high regard by the family – and saved the lives of two of the girls when they were babies. An alcohol lamp heating a humidifier caught Clara’s crib on fire, and Rosa took swift action by throwing the burning bedding and mattress out the window, burning her hands. In a similar incident, daughter Jean was rescued from a flaming crib. 

Hay served as the German tutor for the Clemens children, and was instructed to speak to them in that language only. Little Clara reacted:  “I wish God hadn’t made Rosa in German!” Clemens wrote of Rosa:  “She had a smart sense of humor, an easy & cordial laugh which was catching, & a cheery spirit which pervaded the premises like an atmosphere. She had good sense, good courage, unusual presence of mind in seasons of danger, & a sound judgment in exercising it.” 

Hay remained with the family until she married an Elmira farmer in 1883. Her husband, Horace Terwilliger, seems to have been a clerk in the New York State Assembly for a while, and Rosa worked for a lawyer in Buffalo. After his death, her life ended sadly in suicide, as she threw herself over Niagara Falls.

### GRID– Elizabeth  “Lizzie” Wells (birth and death dates unknown)
Elizabeth “Lizzie” Wells was one of many housemaids who worked for the Clemenses in their Hartford home. Others included Ellen, Harriet, Lillian, Mary, Kate, and Josie: Known primarily by their first names, the housemaids who served in the Clemens home were responsible for “above the stairs” duties, including cleaning and tidying the main rooms of the house; lighting and maintaining the fires, fireplaces, and gas fixtures; and preparing guest rooms for visitors.  

Most of the Clemens maids “lived in,” meaning that they had rooms on the second floor above the kitchen wing.  In addition to their pay, which Clemens once recorded in a notebook as $150 a year, the maids were provided a room furnished with a bed, bureau, wash stand and a coal stove for heating.  

Maids worked long hours, typically from early in the morning until 9 p.m. or later, if there were guests in the house.  Free time was limited and visitors were restricted. Friends and followers (aka boyfriends) had to be out by 10 p.m. when Clemens set the burglar alarm. 

In the summer of 1877 the members of the Clemens family were enjoying their usual summer stay in Elmira, N.Y., when Samuel was called back to Hartford, where the house was being looked after by the family servants. When Clemens got there, he heard the news that the house had been burglarized – but soon learned that things were more complicated. “If you don’t think this is a nice kettle of fish, you don’t know anything about fish, Livy my darling,” he wrote to his wife.

Interviewing the staff, he realized there had been no burglar – just incursions by friends of chambermaid Elizabeth “Lizzie” Wills setting off the house’s battery-operated alarms. The perpetrators were “one or both of Lizzie’s two loafers.” With the collusion of other servants she had let some young men, including her beau William Taylor, into the house. One of the loafers had been seen sitting with Wills on one of the house’s balconies. The other servants were aware that Willie and a pal had been playing pool on Clemens’s billiard table – his holy of holies!  Acting as judge and jury, he invited Taylor to his study, with the local sheriff and his minister friend Rev. Joseph Twichell hidden in nearby rooms. He gave the “loafer” a choice: marry Wills or go to jail as a burglar. After some resistance Wills agreed to the first choice. Clemens gave the couple $100 to start out with and the servants drank a toast to the union.

For Clemens, the incident was the start of a good story of how he convinced Taylor to marry Wills, which he fictionalized for a humorous short story called “Wapping Alice.” He returned to the story several times, changing the characters until finally, in 1907, he wrote a factual account of the story.  The story went unpublished until the Mark Twain Papers published it in the 1980s.

### GRID– Daniel Molloy (c.1862-1930)
In the spring of 1883 Daniel T. Molloy, an Irish immigrant living in Hartford, heard that Mark Twain needed a gardener. Not just any gardener, Molloy told an interviewer years later, but one who had worked for “an Earl or a Duke.” Samuel Clemens was probably being playful, but Molloy had in fact worked for the Earl of Portarlington  in Ireland. Molloy knocked on the door of the Farmington Avenue house, but Clemens was in a “creative fever” – before him was a summer of resuming work on Huckleberry Finn, which he had set aside for three years. The Irishman returned in the afternoon. “Are you the man who was here this morning?” Clemens asked. He was, and started to recount his resume. “It doesn’t make any difference about your experience,” Clemens said. “Consider yourself hired.”

“I never worked for a better man,” Molloy said, though he once rebuked his boss for always summoning him with a whistle. Molloy got tired of this and finally refused to reply. “I didn’t hear you call me,” he told Clemens. “I heard you call a dog.”

Molloy’s copy of *Popular Floriculture* by Peter Henderson, a well-known work among gardeners of the era, is in the Museum’s archive today. The book was given to Molloy by Olivia Clemens. We can see notes Molloy made in the margins, particularly in sections about things like getting roses to bloom in the winter in greenhouses or are those that blossom late in the season, as the Clemenses spent their summers in Elmira, New York, and did not go in much for summer blooms in Hartford.

Ill health forced him to resign in October 1885. Upon his resignation, Molloy received as a signed copy of *Uncle Tom’s Cabin* from neighbor Harriet Beecher Stowe. “I used to leave the door of the greenhouse open,” he said, “so she could go in and pick a flower.” Clemens gave him three months’ wages so that he could recuperate in Ireland, his home country, and supplied a hand-written testimonial: 

> *The bearer, Daniel Molloy, has served me two years and seven months and this is to certify (& I do it voluntarily & unasked), that in all that time he has been a model of industry, sobriety & fidelity; has shown a willing disposition; & has neither created, nor allowed himself to be drawn into trouble with the other servants. He could stay with me the rest of his life if the state of his health would enable him to do the work required.* 

> *I am not qualified to speak as to his abilities as a gardener, for I know nothing of such things, but I am quite sure that he can be depended upon to describe his capacities himself without intentionally exaggerating them.* 

Whatever health issue caused him to leave the Clemenses’ employ, it did not prevent Molloy from serving more than 32 years on the Hartford police force. At the time of the 1928 interview there was local controversy about the fate of the Mark Twain House that was to culminate in the building’s preservation a year later. “I hope the poor man hasn’t turned over in his grave at all the contention over buying his house as a memorial to him,” Molloy said. “I feel he deserves some kind of a memorial, for he has certainly brought fame and honor to Hartford.” 

### GRID– John O’Neil (1848-1923)  and Ellen O’Neil (1852-1927)
John and Ellen O’Neil (nee Dougherty) arrived in the United States from Ireland in 1871, and joined the Clemens household when John was hired as the gardener in 1885. He earned $50 a month, and later $60,  but did not receive room and board as some servants did. To supplement their income, they sold flowers from the greenhouse on the property, switching to Christmas trees at the proper time of year. Samuel Clemens wrote that the O’Neils were two of “the three persons I have had long acquaintance with who could be trusted to do their work well & faithfully without supervision,” the third being coachman Patrick McAleer. 

When financial troubles led the Clemenses to close up the house and leave for Europe in 1891, the O’Neils moved into the house and served as caretakers.  Olivia Clemens wrote to Ellen O’Neil in 1892: “I am sure everything is going well and I do not have one single moment of worry about anything there. I know that you and John will take good care of everything.” When the Clemens rented the house for a period, the O’Neils moved into the second floor of the carriage house, where McAleer and his family had once resided, and took care of the property until it was sold in 1903. Photographs of the house during this period clearly show their advertising sign on the lawn: It reads “CUT FLOWERS FOR SALE \ JOHN O’NEIL.”

When Olivia Clemens died in Italy in 1904, the O’Neils wrote a letter of condolence and sent flowers. Samuel Clemens answered: *Of all the tributes of homage & affection for our lost one that have come from her friends in many lands, that which came from you & John has moved me most & touched me deepest. Those white roses spoke a message of love as pure & fragrant as themselves; & the like of that love was in Mrs. Clemens’s heart for you two to her last day. She held you in as high honor as she held any of her other friends, & she never spoke your names but with affection.*

### GRID– Patrick McAleer (c1884-1906)
Coachman Patrick McAleer arrived in the Clemens family on the day of Samuel and Olivia’s wedding in Elmira, New York, February 2, 1870. “He was Irish, young, slender, bright, quick as a cat, a master of his craft,” Clemens wrote, counting him, along with gardener John O’Neill and his wife Ellen, as “one of the only three persons I have had long acquaintance with who could be trusted to do their work well & faithfully without supervision…He kept his horses and carriages and cows in good condition; he kept the bins & the hayloft full; if a horse and cow was unsatisfactory he made a change; he filled the cellars with coal and wood in the summers when we were away; as soon as a snowstorm was ended he was out with his snow-plow; if a thing needed mending he attended to it at once. “ 

McAleer rode horseback with the Clemens daughters, Clara and Susy, and drove them in the carriage with their mother on afternoon jaunts. He let Clara drive occasionally, her father reports, “holding the reins in the safe places and prattling a stream; and when she outgrew the situation Jean took it, and continued the din of talk.”

The girls “conferred their society upon him freely in the stable, and he protected them while they took risks in petting the horses in the stalls and in riding the reluctant calves.” He let them help stable his horses and drive the ducks down to the stream below the house. (His occasional euthanization of ducks maimed by snapping turtles led little daughter Jean to say once, “I wonder God lets us have so much ducks, Patrick kills them so.”)

In 1872, Patrick married Mary Reagan (1854-1913) from Elmira, New York. Together Mary and Patrick raised at least seven children – Michael, James, Edward, William, Mary, Alice, and Anna–  in the small, two story living quarters attached to the carriage house, which also served as a barn with a hayloft. A son, William McAleer,  remembered the good times he and his brothers and sisters had leaping from a second-floor hayloft balcony.  When in 1906 news came to Clemens in New York that McAleer had died, he rushed to Hartford and served as pallbearer.
