---
title: Meet the Neighborhoods
layout: about
permalink: /digital-exhibition/meet-the-neighborhoods.html
# include CollectionBuilder info at bottom
credits: false
# Edit the markdown on in this file to describe your collection
# Look in _includes/feature for options to easily add features to the page
---
Samuel Clemens first visited Hartford in 1868 and was immediately attracted to the city’s sophisticated population, dynamic commerce, splendid homes, broad avenues, and natural beauty.

The neighborhood in which he settled, Nook Farm, perhaps most typified these qualities. Set at the western edge of Connecticut’s capital city, Nook Farm had previously been primarily farm land, but by the mid-1800s, new homes began to rise. The parcel Samuel and his wife Olivia purchased in 1871 was long and narrow, extending south from Farmington Avenue, already an important though relatively quiet artery. Over time the couple would come to own nearly eight acres by expanding his holdings to the west and further south.

The house and the neighborhood  reinforced the fact that the Clemenses had “arrived”: he was now settled in a wealthy city, in its most exclusive enclave with Connecticut’s governor, United States Senator, newspaper publishers, a noted Civil War general, as well as another of the nation’s literary titans, Harriet Beecher Stowe as his neighbors.

## GRID– The Warners


### George (1833-1919) & Lilly Gillette Warner (1838-1915) 
George married Nook Farm resident Elisabeth "Lilly" Gillette, daughter of Francis and Elisabeth Gillette, in 1867, and in 1873, built their own home just north of the Gillette's. George and Lilly Warner's home, combining many architectural styles, was designed by Edward Tuckerman Potter, who subsequently designed the Clemens’ house. George and Lilly sold the house in 1884 to brother Charles and his wife Susan, who lived there until 1900. The house was torn down in the 1950s for a new Hartford high school. A talented artist, Lilly painted with Harriet Beecher Stowe. In 1876, the family moved into her parents' home, the Gillette House just next door. 
 
### Susan Lee (1838-1921) & Charles Dudley Warner (1829-1900) 
Author and editor Charles Warner married Susan Lee in 1856. In 1860, the couple moved to Nook Farm when friend Joseph Hawley offered Charles the associate editorship of the Hartford Evening Press. Susan was a distinguished pianist with a warm personality, who held informal weekly concerts at home. She helped establish the Hartford Philharmonic Orchestra in 1899. Charles became editor of The Hartford Courant and his book *My Summer in a Garden* (1870) comically detailed life at Nook Farm. He co-authored *The Gilded Age* in 1873 with his friend Mark Twain. 
 
### Frank Gillette Warner (1867-1931) 
George and Lilly Warner's oldest child Frank grew up in Nook Farm just as his mother and uncle did. He enjoyed fishing, sledding, and ice-skating on the Park River with his friends. His mother's letters to her husband describe Frank's frolics in the neighborhood. Frank Warner became a successful commercial photographer. 
 
### Margaret Warner (1872-1931) 
George and Lilly's youngest child Margaret, nicknamed "Daisy", was a friend of the three Clemens daughters. She was a bold, courageous girl, with an interest in art. Daisy graduated from Bryn Mawr in the 1890s. 

## GRID– The Hookers
### John Hooker (1816-1901) 
Lawyer John Hooker married Isabella Beecher in 1841. With his brother-in-law Francis Gillette, he purchased 140 acres known as ‘Nook Farm' in 1853. John and Isabella raised three children in Nook Farm. A graduate of Yale, John spent his early adulthood in the abolitionist movement and was an advocate for votes for women. Hooker served as a congregational deacon; but intellectually curious, he accepted the Spiritualism belief that it was possible to communicate with spirits. 

Designed by Octavius Jordan, this Gothic-style house was built for John and Isabella Beecher Hooker (Stowe's sister) at the corner of Forest and Hawthorn Streets. The home quickly became a popular spot. Samuel and Olivia Clemens leased the house from 1871-1874 while the Hookers were abroad. The Hookers sold their home in 1885, moving in with son Edward on Farmington Avenue. The house is now apartments. 
 
### [Isabella Beecher Hooker (1822-1907)](http://www.harrietbeecherstowecenter.org/hbs/beecher_family.shtml#08)
Isabella Beecher, who married John Hooker in 1841, may have been the most liberal Nook Farm neighbor. She was a founder of the National Woman's Suffrage Association and the Connecticut Woman's Suffrage Association. Like many residents, Isabella explored Spiritualism and held séances to reach departed family and friends. Spiritualism was connected to other progressive political and social reforms, and an attempt to scientifically prove that human spirits continued after death. 
 
### Mary Hooker Burton (1845-1886) 
Eldest daughter of John and Isabella Beecher Hooker, Mary married Henry Eugene Burton (1840-1904) in 1866. The couple had one surviving daughter and an unhappy marriage. They were separated by 1883. Mary was residing with her parents when she died of consumption at age 41. 
 
### Alice Hooker Day (1847-1928) 
Second daughter of John and Isabella Beecher Hooker, Alice Hooker married lawyer John C. Day (1835-1899) in 1869. The Days lived in Europe for many years, but frequently returned to Hartford and regularly visited their Nook Farm relatives. John and Alice leased the Clemens House while that family was in Europe from 1895-1896. 
 
### Edward "Ned" Hooker (1855-1927) 
Son of John and Isabella Beecher Hooker, Ned grew up in the neighborhood. He was a teen-ager when the Stowes first moved to Forest Street. He became a homeopathic doctor and looked after both Calvin and Harriet Beecher Stowe in their old age. 
 
### Katharine "Kathy" Seymour Day (1870-1964) & Alice "Allie" Hooker Day (1872-1926) 
Kathy & Allie were Alice Hooker Day's daughters and Isabella Beecher Hooker's granddaughters. As young girls, the sisters spent much time in Nook Farm, but moved to Europe in their late teens. Kathy Day studied art in Paris and New York before settling in Hartford when she purchased the Stowe House in 1924. Her many preservation projects include the Mark Twain House, the Chamberlin-Day House (named in her honor) and the Harriet Beecher Stowe House. Alice married Percy Jackson in 1909. Like her grandmother Isabella Beecher Hooker, she became a woman's rights activist. 

## GRID– The Stowes
After Calvin Stowe’s retirement, the family relocated to Hartford, CT. There Harriet Beecher Stowe built her dream house, Oakholm, in Nook Farm, a neighborhood full of friends and relatives. The high maintenance cost and the encroachment of factories caused her to sell her mansion in 1870 and move to their house in Mandarin, Florida. For two years, they stayed with friends or family when they came north. In a letter, Harriet told her children of her desire to buy a smaller house at Nook Farm. In 1873, she settled into a brick Victorian Gothic cottage-style house on Forest Street. She remained there for 23 years, until her death in 1896.  The house was later bought by Katherine Day, Harriet's niece, who lived in it for many years before establishing a foundation to preserve the house. Fully restored, the Stowe House is owned and maintained by the Harriet Beecher Stowe Center. 

While residing in Hartford, Stowe undertook two speaking tours, one along the east coast, the second taking her to the western states. Promoting progressive ideals, she helped reinvigorate the art museum at the Wadsworth Atheneum and helped establish the Hartford Art School, which eventually became part of the University of Hartford. Stowe wrote some of her best known works, after Uncle Tom's Cabin, while living in Hartford: The American Woman's Home (1869), Lady Byron Vindicated (1871) and Pogunuc People (1878) 

## GRID– The Gillettes
### Francis (1807-1879) & Elisabeth Hooker Gillette (1813-1893) 
Abolitionist Francis Gillette married Elisabeth Hooker in 1834 and settled in Farmington, Connecticut where their home was a stop on the underground railroad. In 1853 with his brother-in-law John Hooker, they purchased 140 acres known as ‘Nook Farm'. Gillette's first Nook Farm home was a farmhouse on the northeast corner of Forest and Hawthorn. Francis served as U.S. senator (1854-55), and was chairman of the Connecticut board of education (1849-65). He opposed women's suffrage, differing with sister-in-law and neighbor Isabella Beecher Hooker, but the issue did not disrupt their friendship.  The couple had four children, including actor and playwright William Gillette. In 1876, their daughter Lilly Gillette Warner and her family moved into the home. 
 
### William Gillette (1853-1937) 
William Gillette's parents wanted him to become a lawyer, but he loved the theater and became one of the most celebrated actors and playwrights of his generation. His many productions included dramas and comedies, and he co-starred with the likes of Helen Hayes and Ethel Barrymore. In 1899, Gillette starred in his own adaptation of Conan Doyle's Sherlock Holmes. The role would define his career. 
 
Born and raised in Nook Farm, Gillette attended Hartford Public High School, put on plays with his friends, and built a stationary steam engine in his parents' home. He was a fun-loving uncle to his sister Lilly's children, and the family awaited his visits to Nook Farm. His mansion in Hadlyme, "Gillette Castle", was completed in 1919 and purchased by the state of Connecticut after his death. 


## GRID– The Perkins
### Thomas Clap Perkins (1798-1870) & Mary Beecher Perkins (1805-1900)  
Lawyer Thomas Clap Perkins married teacher Mary Beecher in 1827. The couple had four children, and one of their granddaughters was author Charlotte Perkins Gilman. Mary, known as the "quiet" Beecher sister, was not a public activist like her siblings. Her letters, though, reveal a witty, articulate observer of her times. The Perkins were among the first residents of Nook Farm; and when they built their new house in 1866, it was on nearby Woodland Street. This home was built for Thomas Clap and Mary Beecher Perkins (Stowe's sister) -- and occupied by them from 1855 to 1866 -- on the south side of Hawthorn Street, across from the home of Mary's sister Isabella Beecher Hooker. The architect was Octavius Jordon. Charles Dudley and Susan Warner lived here from 1866-1884. As the family home of Dr. Thomas and feminist Katharine Houghton Hepburn from 1908 to 1917, it was the childhood home of actor Katharine Hepburn.


## GRID– Asylum Hill Congregational  
As the city of Hartford developed as a manufacturing, insurance, and shipping port in the mid-19th century, many of the wealthier residents built homes on its western fringe, previously a scene of fields, meadows, ponds, and the city’s poorhouse. Downtown churches now seemed too far for convenient Sunday morning travel, and pious Congregationalists had run a Sunday school there for several years before the church building was built in 1865.

The architect, Patrick Keely, designed a spired stone church much more in the English parish church tradition than the simple wooden meeting-house style previously used by Congregationalist congregations. Its upper-crust Protestant reputation was such that Samuel Clemens, on a business trip to the city in 1868, called it “The Church of the Holy Speculators.” When they arrived to live in the city in 1871, he and Olivia became regular attendees of the church, worshipping at a downtown church that had better music program only when their close friend, Rev. Joseph Twichell, was away. Samuel took part in church social functions, including a much-publicized spelling bee, and often accompanied Twichell to speaking engagements on behalf of the church at hospitals and missions for the poor.


## GRID– Joseph Hopkins Twichell (1838-1918)
Mark Twain’s best friend – “first after Livy” – was a minister. Samuel Clemens’s deep cynicism about religious hypocrisy, and his late-life writings in which he faced the universe with near-ostentatious despair, would seem to make such a friendship unlikely.

But Rev. Joseph Hopkins Twichell of Hartford was indeed Clemens’s intimate friend for most of the author’s life. He provided comradeship, humor, and consolation even when the two men were locked in argument. The two families were close – Mark was “Uncle Mark” to the nine Twichell children and Joe was “Uncle Joe” to the three Clemens girls. At the end of one particularly argumentative letter, Clemens wrote: “Joe, the whole tribe shout love to you and yours.”

Clemens enjoyed the irony of this companionship: “I keep a clergyman to remonstrate against my drinking — It gives zest and increase of appetite.”

Twichell was born in Southington, Connecticut, and after graduating from Yale joined a New York regiment as chaplain during the Civil War. As Clemens wrote, “he breathed the smoke of a hundred battles” before being installed as minister in Hartford’s brand-new Asylum Hill Congregational Church in 1865.

He remained there for 47 years, along the way accompanying his author friend on walks in the hills west of Hartford, on the brilliantly white roads of Bermuda, and the rugged trails of the Alps. Their life was a constant dialogue, in person and in correspondence. Describing one time when he walked with Twichell, Clemens said: “We discussed everything we knew, during the first fifteen or twenty minutes, that morning, and then branched out into the glad, free, boundless realm of the things we were not certain about.”

Twichell was there for the tragedies of Clemens’s late life – the loss of daughter Susy, of wife Olivia, of daughter Jean. And for the end of the author’s own time, when Twichell informed the world through the pages of a Hartford newspaper: “With all his brilliant prosperities he had lived to be a lonely, weary-hearted man, and the thought of his departure hence was not unwelcome to him.”

## GRID– Lily Foote
Lilly Gillette Foote was born in 1860 in Guilford, Connecticut and spent her formative years in the state before she left to study at Newnham College, in Cambridge, England. After her studies she moved to Hartford in 1880 at age 20 and was soon after hired by the Clemens family as a governess. The Clemens daughters, Susy and Clara, were 8 and 6 respectively when their parents brought in Miss Gillette to help with their education. Hired to teach children, governesses were often single women of the same social class as her employers – “Miss Foote” was a cousin of neighbor Harriet Beecher Stowe and an uncle had been governor of Connecticut. Samuel Clemens noted, “Mrs. Clemens and I, and Miss Foote, the governess, were in our respective degrees of efficiency & opportunity trainers of the children – conscious & intentional ones.” She worked for the Clemens family for approximately eleven years, only taking one year off to study overseas once more. (link or image of letter of introduction Samuel wrote for her. It is in our collection). Foote went on to serve as a private teacher for several other girls in the neighborhood. According to her obituary in 1932, Foote was “greatly interested in the literary and artistic life of the city. She combined sand judgment with a keen spiritual intuition. She possessed, though a woman of small physical endowment, great courage and an interest in all that concerned the welfare and culture of the city. She was particularly active in the foundation of the Mark Twain Memorial Library.”  

## GRID– Karl Gerhart  

Karl Gerhardt was born in Boston, Massachusetts in 1853. His training was originally as a house painter and apprenticed with that career in mind. However, instead of following that path he became a machinist at Ames Foundry and showed promise in the field of mechanics. This led him to become a designer of machinery and equipment in Hartford. He married Harriet Gloyd and worked briefly for Pratt and Whitney Machine Tool Company. During his downtime Gerhardt focused on sculpting and found it to be a passion of his. His first known sculpture was, A Startled Bather, with his wife as the model for it. On a fateful day in 1881 the Gerhardts knocked on the door of the Clemens family asking if they would be interested in visiting his studio to look at his work. They agreed and Samuel and Olivia were surprised to see a life-sized depiction of Harriet Gerhardt nude to her waist in sculpture but were impressed with the artistry. After Samuel asked for professional advice from his prominent artist friends, he and Olivia decided to finance Gerhardt’s education at the leading art school in Paris, Ecole des Beaux-Arts. Clemens also financed his living models and private art instruction. Gerhardt went on to create some renowned work including a statue of Connecticut’s state hero Nathan Hale, a statue of General Warren posed on Little Round Top in Gettysburg, a bust of Mark Twain featured in the frontispiece of Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, and the death mask of President Ulysses S. Grant (link to image and link to story). By 1891 Gerhardt’s commissions had diminished drastically and he returned to work as a draftsman and machinist to make ends meet. He spent a short amount of time working for Pope Manufacturing Company (link) in Hartford famous for their bicycles. After his wife died in 1897 from tetanus due to a rusty nail, Gerhardt moved to New Orleans and worked as a laborer and tailor until his death in 1940. 

## GRID– Morgan Buckley 
Born in East Haddam, Connecticut, Morgan Garden Bulkeley and his family relocated to the capitol city not long after where he received his formal education. He moved to Brooklyn, New York for his first job before the outbreak of Civil War where he served briefly albeit saw no action. After the death of his father, Bulkeley moved back to Hartford and settled down as a bank president and a board member of Aetna Insurance Company (becoming President in 1879 until the end of his life). Though he had little experience in baseball, he became the first president of the National League when the Hartford Dark Blues applied for membership in 1876; he served for one season. Bulkeley spent most of his life in politics and served as mayor of Hartford for two terms, followed by governor of Connecticut for two terms, and ended as a U.S. Senator from 1905 until 1911. 

He spent his final years involved in philanthropy, helping to give back to the community where he spent the majority of his life. After his death in 1922, the city decided to name a bridge and a high school in his honor. According to Bulkeley’s biographer Kevin Murphy, “He [Bulkeley] was shrewd, pragmatic, sometimes wildly vindictive – but he was also courteous, loyal, and even kind. He wasn’t a ‘man for all season,’ but he accomplished an enormous amount without receiving even a high school diploma. In the pantheon of Connecticut politics, he has his own special place..” 

## GRID– The Hawleys 
### Joseph and Harriette F. Hawley, 1860-1867 
Multi-talented Joseph Roswell Hawley (1826 - 1905) was a lawyer partnering with John Hooker in 1850, an associate editor of the Hartford Evening Press with Charles Dudley Warner, and a general during the Civil War. Hawley married Harriet W. Foote, and settled in a rented cottage in Nook Farm, adjacent to the property they would later purchase but never build on. Hawley held multiple political offices including governor of Connecticut (1866), state congressman (1873), and U.S. senator (1881-1905). He also led the United States Centennial Commission which organized the 1876 Centennial Exhibition in Philadelphia. 
 
### Harriet Foote Hawley (1831-1886) 
Harriet Foote Hawley, a first cousin of the Beechers, married Joseph R. Hawley in 1855. During the Civil War Harriet became her husband's confidential secretary and adviser, and the Seventh Connecticut Regiment honored her for her work. In the 1880s, the Hawleys moved to Washington, D.C., where Harriet served as president of the Indian Rights Association, which advocated equal rights for Native Americans. 

## GRID– Dr. Taft
Some would argue that Cincinnatus Taft became a doctor due to his childhood when he suffered from frequent and unyielding hemorrhages from his lungs. Several doctors told his parents that this was a result of his lungs not working properly and he would likely live six months or less. Thankfully, he greatly exceeded their expectations and decades later found himself in school to become a doctor. Taft graduated from the College of Physicians and Surgeons of New York before moving to Hartford in 1846 to take over his brother Gustavus’ homeopathic practice which he started in 1842.  His office was located at 311 Main Street in downtown. Although he had an office, he often visited the sick at their home as well. Doctors often made house calls in order for the patient to remain comfortable and safe in their own home. This would also allow doctors to survey the environment of the patient and determine if there were potential factors that were contributing to their sickness and could help determine the cause. He was the third homeopathic doctor to settle in Hartford and the seventh in the state of Connecticut.

One of his first interactions as the Clemens family physician was in May of 1872 when they telegraphed ahead of their arrival back to Hartford after spending time with Olivia’s family in Elmira, New York. Their first born and only son, Langdon Clemens, had developed a bad cough and he needed to be looked at. A few days later Langdon was diagnosed with diphtheria and died shortly thereafter, five months shy of his second birthday. Dr. Taft often treated the Clemens family members, whether it was youngest daughter Jean’s scarlet fever or Olivia feeling weak and unwell. He was known to be social despite his busy schedule visiting and serving patients throughout Hartford. He was known to stay twenty or thirty minutes after serving his patient to talk and catch up with them.

The Clemens had a strong relationship with Dr. Taft and when he fell ill himself, Samuel wrote to him: To my poor mind the first of holy callings is the physician’s; & he should walk before the Pope, & Cardinal, & all the priestly tribe, for he heals all that fall in his way, not merely the chance sufferer here & there who is willing to say first, ‘Good Galilean, I subscribe to the conditions.’ And to my mind, first of all the good physicians is our good physician; & to him I & mine send homage & greeting…” Doctors were an integral part of the community and had intimate relationships with many families they treated.

A year later Dr. Taft was ailing once more, and Samuel wrote to him offering to have him carried on a waterbed to their home to escape the noisy celebration of Buckingham Day. The family offered to delay their departure from Hartford for their annual summer trip to Elmira, if they could be in any service to him. Sadly, a few weeks later Dr. Taft died at age 64 due to a stomach ailment. Taft’s widow, Ellen, wrote to Samuel upset about a New York Times article regarding her husband which she felt focused too much on his autopsy. She implored him, “…I want you, who knew, loved, and appreciated him to write something which will be as pleasant to us to read as the one I alluded to was unpleasant. You knew his tender gentle ways in a sick room, the courage he gave his patients to live, as well as the skill that supported that courage, the blessed cleanliness of his person, and of his attire – How the little children loved him, and how he returned this love. All these traits give so much….Isn’t it strange that the world goes on just the same and he out of it—where?” 
