---
title: Visitors on Parade
layout: about
permalink: /digital-exhibition/visitors-on-parade.html
# include CollectionBuilder info at bottom
credits: false
# Edit the markdown on in this file to describe your collection
# Look in _includes/feature for options to easily add features to the page
---
The Clemens family home was built with three guestrooms. The first floor Mahogany suite made up of a large bedroom, a dressing room, and bathroom attached was meant for prominent guests. Authors Grace King, Bret Harte, and George Washington Cable are among those that stayed there. Over the seventeen years the family lived in the house they welcomed other prominent guests such as Sir Henry Stanley, P.T. Barnum, Generals Sheridan and Sherman, and Edwin Booth, however there is no evidence that they stayed overnight. The second-floor guestroom was meant for family and often it was Olivia’s widowed mother who would occupy it. It had been designed specifically as a place for her to spend several months a year with the family.  The final guestroom was located on the third floor and was referred to as “The Artist’s Friend’s Room” which may have derived its name from Samuel Clemens’s mischievous delight in portraying himself as an artist. This was a place for a male guest to retire after a late night of drinking and billiards. The exception was in 1887 when it housed Aoki Koto House, the adopted daughter of Clemens’s journalist friend and later enemy – Edward H. House. When the Bissell family lived in the house, they hosted President Theodore Roosevelt for dinner.

GRID– Grace King
----------------

Grace King was a southern writer from New Orleans who focused on stories, events, and the  history of her home state of Louisiana. Born in 1851 to a well-known and respected family who lost most of their money and property during the Civil War, Grace focused on her formal education. She was an avid reader and during the 1885 Cotton Centennial Exposition she met the editor Richard Watson Gilder and they had discussions about George W. Cable (link) why King herself did not attempt to write her own stories of Louisiana. The next day she put pen to paper and wrote her first published short story. With assistance from good friend and fellow author, Charles Dudley Warner (link) she focused on writing and made it her goal to become financially independent. Through Warner she met Samuel Clemens (link to her first impression of him) in June of 1887 and she quickly became friends with the entire Clemens family. They all became frequent correspondents with her over the years. Olivia enjoyed discussing books and authors with King and the pair often made suggestions to one another about what to read next. The Clemens' daughters adored her and often wrote asking when her next visit to Hartford to stay with them was (link to her description of staying in Mahogany suite). Towards the end of her life King was revered for her literary talent and deep knowledge of southern history. She spent her last several years bedridden and died in January of 1932. She finished her autobiography, Memories of a Southern Woman of letters shortly before she passed away. 

GRID– Bret Harte
----------------

Bret Harte moved to California from New York in 1854 and tried out various occupations before he settled on writing. He spent time as a tutor, assisted at an apothecary, and tried his hand at newspaper reporter.  A few years later he started to put out assorted poems and stories and by 1860 he was writing for the _Golden Era_, a San Francisco newspaper. In the mid-1860s he met Samuel Clemens and the two quickly became friends. In 1868 Harte helped edit Clemens’s manuscript for _Innocents Abroad_, which would go on to become the author’s bestselling book during his lifetime. Harte visited the Clemens home in Hartford in 1876 where he wrote a popular story, “Thankful Blossom” in the Mahogany suite guestroom. He also collaborated with Clemens on the unsuccessful play _Ah Sin_, (a dramatization of his story, “Heathen Chinee”) but due to quarrels during its writing, the two became alienated and remained so. Clemens praised Harte as a writer but disparaged him personally referring to him as a liar and a fraud even going as far as to accuse him of imitating Charles Dickens (Harte’s favorite author as a boy). Despite his animosity towards Harte, Clemens included four written pieces by him in his book, _Library of Humor._ By 1870 Harte was editor of the _Overland Monthly_ and published his most well-known stories there: “The Luck of Roaring Camp,” “Outcasts of Poker Flat,” and “The Heathen Chinee.” However, in 1878 Harte left the United States to accept a position as U.S. Consul in Germany where he stayed for four years before moving on to a similar role in Glasgow, Scotland. He spent his remaining years in London, sending money back home to his wife and children who were not invited to join him overseas. He continued to write until the very end and churned out additional stories and parodies before he died in 1902 of throat cancer. 

GRID– Henry Stanley
-------------------

Sir Henry Morton Stanley, born in 1841, had a long and fulfilling life spending his time as an explorer, writer, soldier, and politician. He is most well known for exploring Africa in search of a missionary and explorer, when he located him, he uttered the famous line, “Dr. Livingstone I presume?” Aside from his discovery of Dr. Livingstone, Stanley spent time searching for the sources of the Nile and Congo rivers, under the auspices of King Leopold II of Belgium. He wrote several books over his lifetime regaling audiences with his tales of adventure and danger including _In Darkest Africa_. Clemens put in heavy efforts to get Stanley to publish with his firm, Charles Webster & Co., unfortunately, he was never able to land a deal. The Clemens family did host Stanley at the Hartford house before leaving for Boston to make a speech, where Clemens would make introductory remarks. Stanley spoke at Unity Hall while in Hartford but was introduced by Rev. Dr. Parker, not Clemens.  He wrote to Stanley and enticed him with the promise of “…silence, & rest, & beer, for the weary; & whisky & billiards for those that are so disposed. Come – say yes.” (do we want to talk about controversy of Stanley or is that unnecessary?) 

GRID– Joel Chandler Harris
--------------------------

Joel Chandler Harris began his working life as a printer and journalist. After working for papers throughout Georgia, in 1876 he joined the staff of the Atlanta _Constitution_, which published his first “Uncle Remus” stories. “Uncle Remus” was a fictional character that narrated stories.These reworkings of African-American folktales, distinguished for their dialect, became very well known. Clemens was a fan of Harris’s work and often read his stories to his daughters. Occasionally he would select pieces for his public readings.  He complimented him by calling him, “the only master the country has produced.” In 1882 Clemens inquired about whether Harris would be interested in joining him and George Washington Cable on a lecture tour. Initially Harris considered the offer and the money it could provide. However, when he met with the two men, they discovered how timid he was. Clemens remarked that he was the “bashfulest grown person” he had ever encountered. Despite this, Clemens and Harris remained good friends. Harris paid a visit to the Hartford house in 1882 and corresponded with Clemens steadily over the next several years. Harris died in 1908, two years before Clemens. 

GRID– George Washington Cable
-----------------------------

A southern writer and former Confederate soldier from New Orleans, George Washington Cable struggled as a young teenager to try to support his family while simultaneously trying to educate himself. In the 1870s, he focused on being a writer of stories about Creole life, which brought him recognition and fame. Clemens first encountered Cable in Hartford in June of 1881, and it started a long and fruitful friendship. They met again the following year in New Orleans and decided to put together a lecture tour. From November 1884 through February 1885, Cable and Clemens traveled with one another on their joint lecture tour, which visited more than sixty cities in the United States and Canada. Following the conclusion of the tour Cable decided to pull up his southern roots. According to the Mark Twain Papers & Project, “As an outspoken critic of aspects of southern culture and an advocate of the rights of black Americans, Cable found it difficult to remain in the South, moving to Northampton, Massachusetts, in 1885. Samuel was irritated by what he considered Cable’s excessive piety, his parsimony, and also by his more mundane offenses such as hogging the lectern, but the two remained friendly. In Mark Twain’s book, _Life on the Mississippi_ he referred to Cable as, “The south’s finest literary genius.” 

GRID– Ulysses S. Grant
----------------------

Ulysses S. Grant rose through the ranks quickly during the Civil War before ultimately being appointed general-in-chief of all the Union armies by President Abaham Lincoln. Subsequently he was elected to the United States presidency and served two terms from 1869-1877.In his post-presidency years invested in a brokerage firm run by a friend of his sons. The firm was run as a Ponzi scheme and eventually it collapsed, leaving him penniless. To make matters worse, Grant soon after learned he had throat cancer and a short time to live. In order to provide for his family after his death, Grant decided to take an offer from Century Magazine to write four articles about his time during the Civil War with the potential of penning his memoirs. Clemens hears of the proposed deal which he found lackluster. He countered with his own offer and tried to convince Grant to sign with his publishing firm, Charles L. Webster & Co. His terms were extremely generous, and Grant decided to sign with him instead. Grant died only a few days after he finished his memoirs. They were published posthumously, and the money provided helped set his family up for the remainder of their lives. Clemens presented Grant’s widow Julia, with the largest royalty check ever made up until that point ($200,000). Altogether they made over $400,000. The memoirs are still highly regarded and widely read today. Clemens extolled Grant as “a very great man—& superlatively good.”

GRID– Metropolitan AME Zion Church
----------------------------------

In 1816 African American Christians in Hartford got tired of being segregated in the balconies of churches dominated by Whites, and began to hold Sunday meetings on their own. Ten years later they formed an African Religious Society with its own building on Talcott Street. The society split in 1833, with one faction forming a Congregational church and the other a Methodist Episcopal church.

The Methodist group affiliated with the national African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church founded in New York, also as a reaction to segregation and bias. (This is a denomination separate from the African Methodist Episcopal Church, founded in Philadelphia, though today they share communion.) Blacks had been active in the American Methodist church since its beginnings in the 18th century, with a Black missionary named Harry Hosier aiding Francis Asbury, the White Englishman credited with spreading Methodism in the United States. The specifics of the faith appealed to African Americans as well, particularly a stress on the equality of sinners before God and the church’s strong anti-slavery stance. Among the prominent figures who were members of A.M.E. Zion congregations were Frederick Douglass, Harriet Tubman, and Sojourner Truth.

In the 1850s Hartford’s AME Zion Church was required to move from its site on Talcott Street when the land became part of the new city park, Bushnell Park. The congregation built a new church on Pearl Street. By the time Samuel and Olivia Clemens moved to the city in 1871 the African American community had grown to about 1,000 people in a total city population of about 38,000. The Clemenses’ African American butler, George Griffin, was a “strenuously religious” deacon in the Pearl Street church, Samuel Clemens wrote. In this role he often interceded on behalf of members of the Black community who “sought his advice in their troubles, and he kept many a case of theirs out of the court by settling it himself.” In March 1881 Clemens spoke at the church, joined by the choir.

In 1926 the church moved to a former Methodist church built in 1873-74 – the same years that the Clemenses were building their house. Like the Clemens home, it’s an example of the High Victorian Gothic style, with medieval-style features such as arched windows, buttresses and ceiling beams, along with decorative polychromatic masonry. The original Methodist congregation sold the building to a Jewish congregation, and it had served as a synagogue for eight years before Metropolitan AME Zion Church (as it is now known) purchased the building.